docs/src/developing/on-chain-programs/debugging.md, before:

---
title: "Debugging Programs"
---

Solana programs run on-chain, so debugging them in the wild can be challenging.
To make debugging programs easier, developers can write unit tests that directly
test their program's execution via the Solana runtime, or run a local cluster
that will allow RPC clients to interact with their program.

## Running unit tests

- [Testing with Rust](developing-rust.md#how-to-test)
- [Testing with C](developing-c.md#how-to-test)

## Logging

During program execution both the runtime and the program log status and error
messages.

For information about how to log from a program see the language specific
documentation:

- [Logging from a Rust program](developing-rust.md#logging)
- [Logging from a C program](developing-c.md#logging)

When running a local cluster the logs are written to stdout as long as they are
enabled via the `RUST_LOG` log mask. From the perspective of program
development it is helpful to focus on just the runtime and program logs and not
the rest of the cluster logs. To focus in on program specific information the
following log mask is recommended:

`export RUST_LOG=solana_runtime::system_instruction_processor=trace,solana_runtime::message_processor=info,solana_bpf_loader=debug,solana_rbpf=debug`

Log messages coming directly from the program (not the runtime) will be
displayed in the form:

`Program log: <user defined message>`

## Error Handling

The amount of information that can be communicated via a transaction error is
limited but there are many points of possible failures. The following are
possible failure points and information about what errors to expect and where to
get more information:

- The SBF loader may fail to parse the program, this should not happen since the
  loader has already _finalized_ the program's account data.
  - `InstructionError::InvalidAccountData` will be returned as part of the
    transaction error.
- The SBF loader may fail to setup the program's execution environment
  - `InstructionError::Custom(0x0b9f_0001)` will be returned as part of the
    transaction error. "0x0b9f_0001" is the hexadecimal representation of
    [`VirtualMachineCreationFailed`](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/blob/bc7133d7526a041d1aaee807b80922baa89b6f90/programs/bpf_loader/src/lib.rs#L44).
- The SBF loader may have detected a fatal error during program executions
  (things like panics, memory violations, system call errors, etc...)
  - `InstructionError::Custom(0x0b9f_0002)` will be returned as part of the
    transaction error. "0x0b9f_0002" is the hexadecimal representation of
    [`VirtualMachineFailedToRunProgram`](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/blob/bc7133d7526a041d1aaee807b80922baa89b6f90/programs/bpf_loader/src/lib.rs#L46).
- The program itself may return an error
  - `InstructionError::Custom(<user defined value>)` will be returned. The
    "user defined value" must not conflict with any of the [builtin runtime
    program
    errors](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/blob/bc7133d7526a041d1aaee807b80922baa89b6f90/sdk/program/src/program_error.rs#L87).
    Programs typically use enumeration types to define error codes starting at
    zero so they won't conflict.

In the case of `VirtualMachineFailedToRunProgram` errors, more information about
the specifics of what failed are written to the [program's execution
logs](debugging.md#logging).

For example, an access violation involving the stack will look something like
this:

`SBF program 4uQeVj5tqViQh7yWWGStvkEG1Zmhx6uasJtWCJziofM failed: out of bounds memory store (insn #615), addr 0x200001e38/8`

## Monitoring Compute Budget Consumption

The program can log the remaining number of compute units it will be allowed
before program execution is halted. Programs can use these logs to wrap
operations they wish to profile.

- [Log the remaining compute units from a Rust
  program](developing-rust.md#compute-budget)
- [Log the remaining compute units from a C
  program](developing-c.md#compute-budget)

See [compute budget](developing/programming-model/runtime.md#compute-budget)
for more information.

## ELF Dump

The SBF shared object internals can be dumped to a text file to gain more
insight into a program's composition and what it may be doing at runtime.

- [Create a dump file of a Rust program](developing-rust.md#elf-dump)
- [Create a dump file of a C program](developing-c.md#elf-dump)

## Instruction Tracing

During execution the runtime SBF interpreter can be configured to log a trace
message for each SBF instruction executed. This can be very helpful for things
like pin-pointing the runtime context leading up to a memory access violation.

The trace logs together with the [ELF dump](#elf-dump) can provide a lot of
insight (though the traces produce a lot of information).

To turn on SBF interpreter trace messages in a local cluster configure the
`solana_rbpf` level in `RUST_LOG` to `trace`. For example:

`export RUST_LOG=solana_rbpf=trace`


## Source level debugging

Source level debugging of on-chain programs written in Rust or C can
be done using the stand-alone tool rbpf-cli, included in the SDK, and
lldb, distrubuted with Solana Rust and Clang compiler binary package
sbf-tools.

The rbpf-cli tool loads a compiled on-chain program, executes it in
RBPF virtual machine and runs a gdb server that accepts incoming
connections from LLDB or GDB.  Once lldb is connected to rbpf-cli
gdbserver, it can control execution of an on-chain program.  The
execution environment of rbpf-cli is limited to the loaded program and
the input data only.  Run `rbpf-cli --help` for an example of
specifying input data for parameters of the program entrypoint
function.  Any information that exists on a blockchain is not
available to the program when executed in rbpf-cli. For example, CPI
calls don't work, reading any information from blockchain doesn't
work, etc.

To compile a program for debugging use cargo-build-sbf build utility
with the command line option `--debug`. The utility will generate two
loadable files, one a usual loadable module with the extension `.so`,
and another the same loadable module but containing Dwarf debug
information, a file with extension `.debug`.

To execute a program in debugger, run rbpf-cli with `-u debugger`
command line option. For example, a crate named 'helloworld' is
compiled and an executable program is built in `target/deploy`
directory. There should be three files in that directory
- helloworld-keypair.json -- a keypair for deploying the program,
- helloworld.debug -- a binary file containg debug information,
- helloworld.so -- an executable file loadable into the virtual machine.
The command line for running rbp-cli would be something like this
```
rbpf-cli -u debugger target/deploy/helloworld.so
```

In debugger mode rbpf-cli loads an `.so` file and starts listening for
an incoming connection from a debugger
```
Waiting for a Debugger connection on "127.0.0.1:9001"...
```

To connect to rbpf-cli and execute the program, run lldb. For
debugging rust programs it may be beneficial to run solana-lldb
wrapper to lldb, i.e. at a new shell prompt (other than the one used
to run rbpf-cli) run the command

```
solana-lldb
```

This script is installed in sbf-tools path. If that path is not added
to `PATH` environment variable, it may be necessary to specify the
full path, e.g.
```
~/.cache/solana/v1.35/sbf-tools/llvm/bin/solana-lldb
```
After starting the debugger, load the .debug file by entering the
following command at the debugger prompt
```
(lldb) file target/deploy/helloworld.debug
```
If the debugger finds the file, it will print something like this
```
Current executable set to '/path/helloworld.debug' (bpf).
```

Now, connect to the gdb server that rbpf-cli implements, and debug the
program as usual. Enter the following command at lldb prompt
```
(lldb) gdb-remote 127.0.0.1:9001
```
If the debugger and the gdb server establish a connection, the
execution of the program will be stopped at the entrypoint function,
and lldb should print several lines of the source code around the
entrypoint function signature.  From this point on, normal lldb
commands can be used to control execution of the program being
debugged.


### Debugging in an IDE

To debug on-chain programs in Visual Studio IDE, install the CodeLLDB
extension. Open CodeLLDB Extension Settings. In
Advanced settings change the value of `Lldb: Library` field to the
path of `liblldb.so` (or liblldb.dylib on macOS). For example on Linux a
possible path to Solana customized lldb can be
`/home/<user>/.cache/solana/v1.33/sbf-tools/llvm/lib/liblldb.so.`
where `<user>` is your Linux system username. This can also be added
directly to `~/.config/Code/User/settings.json` file, e.g.
```
{
    "lldb.library": "/home/<user>/.cache/solana/v1.35/sbf-tools/llvm/lib/liblldb.so"
}
```

In `.vscode` subdirectory of your on-chain project, create two files

First file is `tasks.json` with the following content
```
{
    "version": "2.0.0",
    "tasks": [
        {
            "label": "build",
            "type": "shell",
            "command": "cargo build-sbf --debug",
            "problemMatcher": [],
            "group": {
                "kind": "build",
                "isDefault": true
            }
        },
        {
            "label": "rbpf",
            "type": "shell",
            "command": "rbpf-cli -u debugger ${workspaceFolder}/target/deploy/helloworld.so"
        }
    ]
}
```
The first task is to build the on-chain program using cargo-build-sbf
utility. The second task is to run rbpf-cli in debugger mode.

Another file is `launch.json` with the following content
```
{
    "version": "0.2.0",
    "configurations": [
        {
            "type": "lldb",
            "request": "custom",
            "name": "Debug",
            "targetCreateCommands": ["target create ${workspaceFolder}/target/deploy/helloworld.debug"],
            "processCreateCommands": ["gdb-remote 127.0.0.1:9001"]
        }
    ]
}
```
This file specifies how to run debugger and to connect it to the gdb
server implemented by rbpf-cli.

To start debugging a program, first build it by running the build
task. The next step is to run rbpf task. The tasks specified in
`tasks.json` file are started from `Terminal >> Run Task...` menu of
VSCode. When rbpf-cli is running and listening from incoming
connections, it's time to start the debugger.  Launch it from VSCode
`Run and Debug` menu.  If everything is set up correctly, VSCode will
start a debugging session and the porogram execution should stop on
the entrance into the `entrypoint` function.

Commit message:

Update references to platform-tools (#30764)

docs/src/developing/on-chain-programs/debugging.md, after:

---
title: "Debugging Programs"
---

Solana programs run on-chain, so debugging them in the wild can be challenging.
To make debugging programs easier, developers can write unit tests that directly
test their program's execution via the Solana runtime, or run a local cluster
that will allow RPC clients to interact with their program.

## Running unit tests

- [Testing with Rust](developing-rust.md#how-to-test)
- [Testing with C](developing-c.md#how-to-test)

## Logging

During program execution both the runtime and the program log status and error
messages.

For information about how to log from a program see the language specific
documentation:

- [Logging from a Rust program](developing-rust.md#logging)
- [Logging from a C program](developing-c.md#logging)

When running a local cluster the logs are written to stdout as long as they are
enabled via the `RUST_LOG` log mask. From the perspective of program
development it is helpful to focus on just the runtime and program logs and not
the rest of the cluster logs. To focus in on program specific information the
following log mask is recommended:

`export RUST_LOG=solana_runtime::system_instruction_processor=trace,solana_runtime::message_processor=info,solana_bpf_loader=debug,solana_rbpf=debug`

Log messages coming directly from the program (not the runtime) will be
displayed in the form:

`Program log: <user defined message>`

## Error Handling

The amount of information that can be communicated via a transaction error is
limited but there are many points of possible failures. The following are
possible failure points and information about what errors to expect and where to
get more information:

- The SBF loader may fail to parse the program, this should not happen since the
  loader has already _finalized_ the program's account data.
  - `InstructionError::InvalidAccountData` will be returned as part of the
    transaction error.
- The SBF loader may fail to setup the program's execution environment
  - `InstructionError::Custom(0x0b9f_0001)` will be returned as part of the
    transaction error. "0x0b9f_0001" is the hexadecimal representation of
    [`VirtualMachineCreationFailed`](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/blob/bc7133d7526a041d1aaee807b80922baa89b6f90/programs/bpf_loader/src/lib.rs#L44).
- The SBF loader may have detected a fatal error during program executions
  (things like panics, memory violations, system call errors, etc...)
  - `InstructionError::Custom(0x0b9f_0002)` will be returned as part of the
    transaction error. "0x0b9f_0002" is the hexadecimal representation of
    [`VirtualMachineFailedToRunProgram`](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/blob/bc7133d7526a041d1aaee807b80922baa89b6f90/programs/bpf_loader/src/lib.rs#L46).
- The program itself may return an error
  - `InstructionError::Custom(<user defined value>)` will be returned. The
    "user defined value" must not conflict with any of the [builtin runtime
    program
    errors](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/blob/bc7133d7526a041d1aaee807b80922baa89b6f90/sdk/program/src/program_error.rs#L87).
    Programs typically use enumeration types to define error codes starting at
    zero so they won't conflict.

In the case of `VirtualMachineFailedToRunProgram` errors, more information about
the specifics of what failed are written to the [program's execution
logs](debugging.md#logging).

For example, an access violation involving the stack will look something like
this:

`SBF program 4uQeVj5tqViQh7yWWGStvkEG1Zmhx6uasJtWCJziofM failed: out of bounds memory store (insn #615), addr 0x200001e38/8`

## Monitoring Compute Budget Consumption

The program can log the remaining number of compute units it will be allowed
before program execution is halted. Programs can use these logs to wrap
operations they wish to profile.

- [Log the remaining compute units from a Rust
  program](developing-rust.md#compute-budget)
- [Log the remaining compute units from a C
  program](developing-c.md#compute-budget)

See [compute budget](developing/programming-model/runtime.md#compute-budget)
for more information.

## ELF Dump

The SBF shared object internals can be dumped to a text file to gain more
insight into a program's composition and what it may be doing at runtime.

- [Create a dump file of a Rust program](developing-rust.md#elf-dump)
- [Create a dump file of a C program](developing-c.md#elf-dump)

## Instruction Tracing

During execution the runtime SBF interpreter can be configured to log a trace
message for each SBF instruction executed. This can be very helpful for things
like pin-pointing the runtime context leading up to a memory access violation.

The trace logs together with the [ELF dump](#elf-dump) can provide a lot of
insight (though the traces produce a lot of information).

To turn on SBF interpreter trace messages in a local cluster configure the
`solana_rbpf` level in `RUST_LOG` to `trace`. For example:

`export RUST_LOG=solana_rbpf=trace`


## Source level debugging

Source level debugging of on-chain programs written in Rust or C can
be done using the stand-alone tool rbpf-cli, included in the SDK, and
lldb, distrubuted with Solana Rust and Clang compiler binary package
platform-tools.

The rbpf-cli tool loads a compiled on-chain program, executes it in
RBPF virtual machine and runs a gdb server that accepts incoming
connections from LLDB or GDB.  Once lldb is connected to rbpf-cli
gdbserver, it can control execution of an on-chain program.  The
execution environment of rbpf-cli is limited to the loaded program and
the input data only.  Run `rbpf-cli --help` for an example of
specifying input data for parameters of the program entrypoint
function.  Any information that exists on a blockchain is not
available to the program when executed in rbpf-cli. For example, CPI
calls don't work, reading any information from blockchain doesn't
work, etc.

To compile a program for debugging use cargo-build-sbf build utility
with the command line option `--debug`. The utility will generate two
loadable files, one a usual loadable module with the extension `.so`,
and another the same loadable module but containing Dwarf debug
information, a file with extension `.debug`.

To execute a program in debugger, run rbpf-cli with `-u debugger`
command line option. For example, a crate named 'helloworld' is
compiled and an executable program is built in `target/deploy`
directory. There should be three files in that directory
- helloworld-keypair.json -- a keypair for deploying the program,
- helloworld.debug -- a binary file containg debug information,
- helloworld.so -- an executable file loadable into the virtual machine.
The command line for running rbp-cli would be something like this
```
rbpf-cli -u debugger target/deploy/helloworld.so
```

In debugger mode rbpf-cli loads an `.so` file and starts listening for
an incoming connection from a debugger
```
Waiting for a Debugger connection on "127.0.0.1:9001"...
```

To connect to rbpf-cli and execute the program, run lldb. For
debugging rust programs it may be beneficial to run solana-lldb
wrapper to lldb, i.e. at a new shell prompt (other than the one used
to run rbpf-cli) run the command

```
solana-lldb
```

This script is installed in platform-tools path. If that path is not
added to `PATH` environment variable, it may be necessary to specify
the full path, e.g.
```
~/.cache/solana/v1.35/platform-tools/llvm/bin/solana-lldb
```
After starting the debugger, load the .debug file by entering the
following command at the debugger prompt
```
(lldb) file target/deploy/helloworld.debug
```
If the debugger finds the file, it will print something like this
```
Current executable set to '/path/helloworld.debug' (bpf).
```

Now, connect to the gdb server that rbpf-cli implements, and debug the
program as usual. Enter the following command at lldb prompt
```
(lldb) gdb-remote 127.0.0.1:9001
```
If the debugger and the gdb server establish a connection, the
execution of the program will be stopped at the entrypoint function,
and lldb should print several lines of the source code around the
entrypoint function signature.  From this point on, normal lldb
commands can be used to control execution of the program being
debugged.


### Debugging in an IDE

To debug on-chain programs in Visual Studio IDE, install the CodeLLDB
extension. Open CodeLLDB Extension Settings. In
Advanced settings change the value of `Lldb: Library` field to the
path of `liblldb.so` (or liblldb.dylib on macOS). For example on Linux a
possible path to Solana customized lldb can be
`/home/<user>/.cache/solana/v1.33/platform-tools/llvm/lib/liblldb.so.`
where `<user>` is your Linux system username. This can also be added
directly to `~/.config/Code/User/settings.json` file, e.g.
```
{
    "lldb.library": "/home/<user>/.cache/solana/v1.35/platform-tools/llvm/lib/liblldb.so"
}
```

In `.vscode` subdirectory of your on-chain project, create two files

First file is `tasks.json` with the following content
```
{
    "version": "2.0.0",
    "tasks": [
        {
            "label": "build",
            "type": "shell",
            "command": "cargo build-sbf --debug",
            "problemMatcher": [],
            "group": {
                "kind": "build",
                "isDefault": true
            }
        },
        {
            "label": "rbpf",
            "type": "shell",
            "command": "rbpf-cli -u debugger ${workspaceFolder}/target/deploy/helloworld.so"
        }
    ]
}
```
The first task is to build the on-chain program using cargo-build-sbf
utility. The second task is to run rbpf-cli in debugger mode.

Another file is `launch.json` with the following content
```
{
    "version": "0.2.0",
    "configurations": [
        {
            "type": "lldb",
            "request": "custom",
            "name": "Debug",
            "targetCreateCommands": ["target create ${workspaceFolder}/target/deploy/helloworld.debug"],
            "processCreateCommands": ["gdb-remote 127.0.0.1:9001"]
        }
    ]
}
```
This file specifies how to run debugger and to connect it to the gdb
server implemented by rbpf-cli.

To start debugging a program, first build it by running the build
task. The next step is to run rbpf task. The tasks specified in
`tasks.json` file are started from `Terminal >> Run Task...` menu of
VSCode. When rbpf-cli is running and listening from incoming
connections, it's time to start the debugger.  Launch it from VSCode
`Run and Debug` menu.  If everything is set up correctly, VSCode will
start a debugging session and the porogram execution should stop on
the entrance into the `entrypoint` function.
