docs/src/developing/on-chain-programs/developing-c.md, before:

---
title: "Developing with C"
---

Solana supports writing on-chain programs using the C and C++ programming
languages.

## Project Layout

C projects are laid out as follows:

```
/src/<program name>
/makefile
```

The `makefile` should contain the following:

```bash
OUT_DIR := <path to place to resulting shared object>
include ~/.local/share/solana/install/active_release/bin/sdk/sbf/c/sbf.mk
```

The sbf-sdk may not be in the exact place specified above but if you setup your
environment per [How to Build](#how-to-build) then it should be.

## How to Build

First setup the environment:

- Install the latest Rust stable from https://rustup.rs
- Install the latest [Solana command-line tools](../../cli/install-solana-cli-tools.md)

Then build using make:

```bash
make -C <program directory>
```

## How to Test

Solana uses the [Criterion](https://github.com/Snaipe/Criterion) test framework
and tests are executed each time the program is built [How to
Build](#how-to-build).

To add tests, create a new file next to your source file named `test_<program name>.c`
and populate it with criterion test cases. See the [Criterion docs](https://criterion.readthedocs.io/en/master)
for information on how to write a test case.

## Program Entrypoint

Programs export a known entrypoint symbol which the Solana runtime looks up and
calls when invoking a program. Solana supports multiple versions of the SBF loader and the entrypoints may vary between them.
Programs must be written for and deployed to the same loader. For more details
see the [FAQ section on Loaders](./faq.md#loaders).

Currently there are two supported loaders [SBF
Loader](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/blob/7ddf10e602d2ed87a9e3737aa8c32f1db9f909d8/sdk/program/src/bpf_loader.rs#L17)
and [SBF loader
deprecated](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/blob/7ddf10e602d2ed87a9e3737aa8c32f1db9f909d8/sdk/program/src/bpf_loader_deprecated.rs#L14).

They both have the same raw entrypoint definition, the following is the raw
symbol that the runtime looks up and calls:

```c
extern uint64_t entrypoint(const uint8_t *input)
```

This entrypoint takes a generic byte array which contains the serialized program
parameters (program id, accounts, instruction data, etc...). To deserialize the
parameters each loader contains its own [helper function](#Serialization).

### Serialization

Each loader provides a helper function that deserializes the program's input
parameters into C types:

- [SBF Loader
  deserialization](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/blob/d2ee9db2143859fa5dc26b15ee6da9c25cc0429c/sdk/sbf/c/inc/solana_sdk.h#L304)
- [SBF Loader deprecated
  deserialization](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/blob/8415c22b593f164020adc7afe782e8041d756ddf/sdk/sbf/c/inc/deserialize_deprecated.h#L25)

Some programs may want to perform deserialization themselves, and they can by
providing their own implementation of the [raw entrypoint](#program-entrypoint).
Take note that the provided deserialization functions retain references back to
the serialized byte array for variables that the program is allowed to modify
(lamports, account data). The reason for this is that upon return the loader
will read those modifications so they may be committed. If a program implements
their own deserialization function they need to ensure that any modifications
the program wishes to commit must be written back into the input byte array.

Details on how the loader serializes the program inputs can be found in the
[Input Parameter Serialization](./faq.md#input-parameter-serialization) docs.

## Data Types

The loader's deserialization helper function populates the
[SolParameters](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/blob/8415c22b593f164020adc7afe782e8041d756ddf/sdk/sbf/c/inc/solana_sdk.h#L276)
structure:

```c
/**
 * Structure that the program's entrypoint input data is deserialized into.
 */
typedef struct {
  SolAccountInfo* ka; /** Pointer to an array of SolAccountInfo, must already
                          point to an array of SolAccountInfos */
  uint64_t ka_num; /** Number of SolAccountInfo entries in `ka` */
  const uint8_t *data; /** pointer to the instruction data */
  uint64_t data_len; /** Length in bytes of the instruction data */
  const SolPubkey *program_id; /** program_id of the currently executing program */
} SolParameters;
```

'ka' is an ordered array of the accounts referenced by the instruction and
represented as a
[SolAccountInfo](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/blob/8415c22b593f164020adc7afe782e8041d756ddf/sdk/sbf/c/inc/solana_sdk.h#L173)
structures. An account's place in the array signifies its meaning, for example,
when transferring lamports an instruction may define the first account as the
source and the second as the destination.

The members of the `SolAccountInfo` structure are read-only except for
`lamports` and `data`. Both may be modified by the program in accordance with
the [runtime enforcement
policy](developing/programming-model/accounts.md#policy). When an instruction
reference the same account multiple times there may be duplicate
`SolAccountInfo` entries in the array but they both point back to the original
input byte array. A program should handle these cases delicately to avoid
overlapping read/writes to the same buffer. If a program implements their own
deserialization function care should be taken to handle duplicate accounts
appropriately.

`data` is the general purpose byte array from the [instruction's instruction
data](developing/programming-model/transactions.md#instruction-data) being
processed.

`program_id` is the public key of the currently executing program.

## Heap

C programs can allocate memory via the system call
[`calloc`](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/blob/c3d2d2134c93001566e1e56f691582f379b5ae55/sdk/sbf/c/inc/solana_sdk.h#L245)
or implement their own heap on top of the 32KB heap region starting at virtual
address x300000000. The heap region is also used by `calloc` so if a program
implements their own heap it should not also call `calloc`.

## Logging

The runtime provides two system calls that take data and log it to the program
logs.

- [`sol_log(const char*)`](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/blob/d2ee9db2143859fa5dc26b15ee6da9c25cc0429c/sdk/sbf/c/inc/solana_sdk.h#L128)
- [`sol_log_64(uint64_t, uint64_t, uint64_t, uint64_t, uint64_t)`](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/blob/d2ee9db2143859fa5dc26b15ee6da9c25cc0429c/sdk/sbf/c/inc/solana_sdk.h#L134)

The [debugging](debugging.md#logging) section has more information about working
with program logs.

## Compute Budget

Use the system call
[`sol_log_compute_units()`](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/blob/d3a3a7548c857f26ec2cb10e270da72d373020ec/sdk/sbf/c/inc/solana_sdk.h#L140)
to log a message containing the remaining number of compute units the program
may consume before execution is halted

See [compute budget](developing/programming-model/runtime.md#compute-budget)
for more information.

## ELF Dump

The SBF shared object internals can be dumped to a text file to gain more
insight into a program's composition and what it may be doing at runtime. The
dump will contain both the ELF information as well as a list of all the symbols
and the instructions that implement them. Some of the SBF loader's error log
messages will reference specific instruction numbers where the error occurred.
These references can be looked up in the ELF dump to identify the offending
instruction and its context.

To create a dump file:

```bash
$ cd <program directory>
$ make dump_<program name>
```

## Examples

The [Solana Program Library github](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana-program-library/tree/master/examples/c) repo contains a collection of C examples

Commit message:

sdk, programs/bpf_loader: add sol_remaining_compute_units syscall (#31640)
bpf_loader: add sol_remaining_compute_units syscall

Co-authored-by: jonch <9093549+jon-chuang@users.noreply.github.com>

docs/src/developing/on-chain-programs/developing-c.md, after:

---
title: "Developing with C"
---

Solana supports writing on-chain programs using the C and C++ programming
languages.

## Project Layout

C projects are laid out as follows:

```
/src/<program name>
/makefile
```

The `makefile` should contain the following:

```bash
OUT_DIR := <path to place to resulting shared object>
include ~/.local/share/solana/install/active_release/bin/sdk/sbf/c/sbf.mk
```

The sbf-sdk may not be in the exact place specified above but if you setup your
environment per [How to Build](#how-to-build) then it should be.

## How to Build

First setup the environment:

- Install the latest Rust stable from https://rustup.rs
- Install the latest [Solana command-line tools](../../cli/install-solana-cli-tools.md)

Then build using make:

```bash
make -C <program directory>
```

## How to Test

Solana uses the [Criterion](https://github.com/Snaipe/Criterion) test framework
and tests are executed each time the program is built [How to
Build](#how-to-build).

To add tests, create a new file next to your source file named `test_<program name>.c`
and populate it with criterion test cases. See the [Criterion docs](https://criterion.readthedocs.io/en/master)
for information on how to write a test case.

## Program Entrypoint

Programs export a known entrypoint symbol which the Solana runtime looks up and
calls when invoking a program. Solana supports multiple versions of the SBF loader and the entrypoints may vary between them.
Programs must be written for and deployed to the same loader. For more details
see the [FAQ section on Loaders](./faq.md#loaders).

Currently there are two supported loaders [SBF
Loader](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/blob/7ddf10e602d2ed87a9e3737aa8c32f1db9f909d8/sdk/program/src/bpf_loader.rs#L17)
and [SBF loader
deprecated](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/blob/7ddf10e602d2ed87a9e3737aa8c32f1db9f909d8/sdk/program/src/bpf_loader_deprecated.rs#L14).

They both have the same raw entrypoint definition, the following is the raw
symbol that the runtime looks up and calls:

```c
extern uint64_t entrypoint(const uint8_t *input)
```

This entrypoint takes a generic byte array which contains the serialized program
parameters (program id, accounts, instruction data, etc...). To deserialize the
parameters each loader contains its own [helper function](#Serialization).

### Serialization

Each loader provides a helper function that deserializes the program's input
parameters into C types:

- [SBF Loader
  deserialization](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/blob/d2ee9db2143859fa5dc26b15ee6da9c25cc0429c/sdk/sbf/c/inc/solana_sdk.h#L304)
- [SBF Loader deprecated
  deserialization](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/blob/8415c22b593f164020adc7afe782e8041d756ddf/sdk/sbf/c/inc/deserialize_deprecated.h#L25)

Some programs may want to perform deserialization themselves, and they can by
providing their own implementation of the [raw entrypoint](#program-entrypoint).
Take note that the provided deserialization functions retain references back to
the serialized byte array for variables that the program is allowed to modify
(lamports, account data). The reason for this is that upon return the loader
will read those modifications so they may be committed. If a program implements
their own deserialization function they need to ensure that any modifications
the program wishes to commit must be written back into the input byte array.

Details on how the loader serializes the program inputs can be found in the
[Input Parameter Serialization](./faq.md#input-parameter-serialization) docs.

## Data Types

The loader's deserialization helper function populates the
[SolParameters](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/blob/8415c22b593f164020adc7afe782e8041d756ddf/sdk/sbf/c/inc/solana_sdk.h#L276)
structure:

```c
/**
 * Structure that the program's entrypoint input data is deserialized into.
 */
typedef struct {
  SolAccountInfo* ka; /** Pointer to an array of SolAccountInfo, must already
                          point to an array of SolAccountInfos */
  uint64_t ka_num; /** Number of SolAccountInfo entries in `ka` */
  const uint8_t *data; /** pointer to the instruction data */
  uint64_t data_len; /** Length in bytes of the instruction data */
  const SolPubkey *program_id; /** program_id of the currently executing program */
} SolParameters;
```

'ka' is an ordered array of the accounts referenced by the instruction and
represented as a
[SolAccountInfo](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/blob/8415c22b593f164020adc7afe782e8041d756ddf/sdk/sbf/c/inc/solana_sdk.h#L173)
structures. An account's place in the array signifies its meaning, for example,
when transferring lamports an instruction may define the first account as the
source and the second as the destination.

The members of the `SolAccountInfo` structure are read-only except for
`lamports` and `data`. Both may be modified by the program in accordance with
the [runtime enforcement
policy](developing/programming-model/accounts.md#policy). When an instruction
reference the same account multiple times there may be duplicate
`SolAccountInfo` entries in the array but they both point back to the original
input byte array. A program should handle these cases delicately to avoid
overlapping read/writes to the same buffer. If a program implements their own
deserialization function care should be taken to handle duplicate accounts
appropriately.

`data` is the general purpose byte array from the [instruction's instruction
data](developing/programming-model/transactions.md#instruction-data) being
processed.

`program_id` is the public key of the currently executing program.

## Heap

C programs can allocate memory via the system call
[`calloc`](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/blob/c3d2d2134c93001566e1e56f691582f379b5ae55/sdk/sbf/c/inc/solana_sdk.h#L245)
or implement their own heap on top of the 32KB heap region starting at virtual
address x300000000. The heap region is also used by `calloc` so if a program
implements their own heap it should not also call `calloc`.

## Logging

The runtime provides two system calls that take data and log it to the program
logs.

- [`sol_log(const char*)`](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/blob/d2ee9db2143859fa5dc26b15ee6da9c25cc0429c/sdk/sbf/c/inc/solana_sdk.h#L128)
- [`sol_log_64(uint64_t, uint64_t, uint64_t, uint64_t, uint64_t)`](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/blob/d2ee9db2143859fa5dc26b15ee6da9c25cc0429c/sdk/sbf/c/inc/solana_sdk.h#L134)

The [debugging](debugging.md#logging) section has more information about working
with program logs.

## Compute Budget

Use the system call `sol_remaining_compute_units()` to return a `u64` indicating
the number of compute units remaining for this transaction.

Use the system call
[`sol_log_compute_units()`](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/blob/d3a3a7548c857f26ec2cb10e270da72d373020ec/sdk/sbf/c/inc/solana_sdk.h#L140)
to log a message containing the remaining number of compute units the program
may consume before execution is halted

See [compute budget](developing/programming-model/runtime.md#compute-budget)
for more information.

## ELF Dump

The SBF shared object internals can be dumped to a text file to gain more
insight into a program's composition and what it may be doing at runtime. The
dump will contain both the ELF information as well as a list of all the symbols
and the instructions that implement them. Some of the SBF loader's error log
messages will reference specific instruction numbers where the error occurred.
These references can be looked up in the ELF dump to identify the offending
instruction and its context.

To create a dump file:

```bash
$ cd <program directory>
$ make dump_<program name>
```

## Examples

The [Solana Program Library github](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana-program-library/tree/master/examples/c) repo contains a collection of C examples
