docs/src/api/methods/_getSignatureStatuses.mdx, before:

import {
  DocBlock,
  DocSideBySide,
  CodeParams,
  Parameter,
  Field,
  Values,
  CodeSnippets,
} from "../../../components/CodeDocBlock";

<DocBlock>

## getSignatureStatuses

Returns the statuses of a list of signatures.

:::info
Unless the `searchTransactionHistory` configuration parameter is included,
this method only searches the recent status cache of signatures, which
retains statuses for all active slots plus `MAX_RECENT_BLOCKHASHES` rooted slots.
:::

<DocSideBySide>
<CodeParams>

### Parameters:

<Parameter type={"array"} optional={true}>
  An array of transaction signatures to confirm, as base-58 encoded strings (up
  to a maximum of 256)
</Parameter>

<Parameter type={"object"} optional={true}>

Configuration object containing the following fields:

<Field name="searchTransactionHistory" type="bool" optional={true}>

if `true` - a Solana node will search its ledger cache for any signatures not
found in the recent status cache

</Field>

</Parameter>

### Result:

An array of `RpcResponse<object>` consisting of either:

- `<null>` - Unknown transaction, or
- `<object>`
  - `slot: <u64>` - The slot the transaction was processed
  - `confirmations: <usize|null>` - Number of blocks since signature confirmation, null if rooted, as well as finalized by a supermajority of the cluster
  - `err: <object|null>` - Error if transaction failed, null if transaction succeeded.
    See [TransactionError definitions](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/blob/c0c60386544ec9a9ec7119229f37386d9f070523/sdk/src/transaction/error.rs#L13)
  - `confirmationStatus: <string|null>` - The transaction's cluster confirmation status;
    Either `processed`, `confirmed`, or `finalized`. See [Commitment](/api/http#configuring-state-commitment) for more on optimistic confirmation.
  - DEPRECATED: `status: <object>` - Transaction status
    - `"Ok": <null>` - Transaction was successful
    - `"Err": <ERR>` - Transaction failed with TransactionError

</CodeParams>

<CodeSnippets>

### Code sample:

```bash
curl http://localhost:8899 -X POST -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '
  {
    "jsonrpc": "2.0",
    "id": 1,
    "method": "getSignatureStatuses",
    "params": [
      [
        "5VERv8NMvzbJMEkV8xnrLkEaWRtSz9CosKDYjCJjBRnbJLgp8uirBgmQpjKhoR4tjF3ZpRzrFmBV6UjKdiSZkQUW"
      ],
      {
        "searchTransactionHistory": true
      }
    ]
  }
'
```

### Response:

```json
{
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "result": {
    "context": {
      "slot": 82
    },
    "value": [
      {
        "slot": 48,
        "confirmations": null,
        "err": null,
        "status": {
          "Ok": null
        },
        "confirmationStatus": "finalized"
      },
      null
    ]
  },
  "id": 1
}
```

</CodeSnippets>
</DocSideBySide>
</DocBlock>

Commit message:

[docs] Add note about txids to signature status RPC method docs (#31628)

docs/src/api/methods/_getSignatureStatuses.mdx, after:

import {
  DocBlock,
  DocSideBySide,
  CodeParams,
  Parameter,
  Field,
  Values,
  CodeSnippets,
} from "../../../components/CodeDocBlock";

<DocBlock>

## getSignatureStatuses

Returns the statuses of a list of signatures. Each signature must be a [txid](/terminology#transaction-id), the first signature of a transaction.

:::info
Unless the `searchTransactionHistory` configuration parameter is included,
this method only searches the recent status cache of signatures, which
retains statuses for all active slots plus `MAX_RECENT_BLOCKHASHES` rooted slots.
:::

<DocSideBySide>
<CodeParams>

### Parameters:

<Parameter type={"array"} optional={true}>
  An array of transaction signatures to confirm, as base-58 encoded strings (up
  to a maximum of 256)
</Parameter>

<Parameter type={"object"} optional={true}>

Configuration object containing the following fields:

<Field name="searchTransactionHistory" type="bool" optional={true}>

if `true` - a Solana node will search its ledger cache for any signatures not
found in the recent status cache

</Field>

</Parameter>

### Result:

An array of `RpcResponse<object>` consisting of either:

- `<null>` - Unknown transaction, or
- `<object>`
  - `slot: <u64>` - The slot the transaction was processed
  - `confirmations: <usize|null>` - Number of blocks since signature confirmation, null if rooted, as well as finalized by a supermajority of the cluster
  - `err: <object|null>` - Error if transaction failed, null if transaction succeeded.
    See [TransactionError definitions](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/blob/c0c60386544ec9a9ec7119229f37386d9f070523/sdk/src/transaction/error.rs#L13)
  - `confirmationStatus: <string|null>` - The transaction's cluster confirmation status;
    Either `processed`, `confirmed`, or `finalized`. See [Commitment](/api/http#configuring-state-commitment) for more on optimistic confirmation.
  - DEPRECATED: `status: <object>` - Transaction status
    - `"Ok": <null>` - Transaction was successful
    - `"Err": <ERR>` - Transaction failed with TransactionError

</CodeParams>

<CodeSnippets>

### Code sample:

```bash
curl http://localhost:8899 -X POST -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '
  {
    "jsonrpc": "2.0",
    "id": 1,
    "method": "getSignatureStatuses",
    "params": [
      [
        "5VERv8NMvzbJMEkV8xnrLkEaWRtSz9CosKDYjCJjBRnbJLgp8uirBgmQpjKhoR4tjF3ZpRzrFmBV6UjKdiSZkQUW"
      ],
      {
        "searchTransactionHistory": true
      }
    ]
  }
'
```

### Response:

```json
{
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "result": {
    "context": {
      "slot": 82
    },
    "value": [
      {
        "slot": 48,
        "confirmations": null,
        "err": null,
        "status": {
          "Ok": null
        },
        "confirmationStatus": "finalized"
      },
      null
    ]
  },
  "id": 1
}
```

</CodeSnippets>
</DocSideBySide>
</DocBlock>
