docs/src/api/methods/_getHealth.mdx, before:

import {
  DocBlock,
  DocSideBySide,
  CodeParams,
  Parameter,
  Field,
  Values,
  CodeSnippets,
} from "../../../components/CodeDocBlock";

<DocBlock>

## getHealth

Returns the current health of the node.

:::caution
If one or more `--known-validator` arguments are provided to `solana-validator` - "ok" is returned
when the node has within `HEALTH_CHECK_SLOT_DISTANCE` slots of the highest known validator,
otherwise an error is returned. "ok" is always returned if no known validators are provided.
:::

<DocSideBySide>
<CodeParams>

### Parameters:

**None**

### Result:

If the node is healthy: "ok"

If the node is unhealthy, a JSON RPC error response is returned. The specifics of the error response are **UNSTABLE** and may change in the future

</CodeParams>

<CodeSnippets>

### Code sample:

```bash
curl http://localhost:8899 -X POST -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '
  {"jsonrpc":"2.0","id":1, "method":"getHealth"}
'
```

### Response:

Healthy Result:

```json
{ "jsonrpc": "2.0", "result": "ok", "id": 1 }
```

Unhealthy Result (generic):

```json
{
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "error": {
    "code": -32005,
    "message": "Node is unhealthy",
    "data": {}
  },
  "id": 1
}
```

Unhealthy Result (if additional information is available)

```json
{
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "error": {
    "code": -32005,
    "message": "Node is behind by 42 slots",
    "data": {
      "numSlotsBehind": 42
    }
  },
  "id": 1
}
```

</CodeSnippets>
</DocSideBySide>
</DocBlock>

Commit message:

Change getHealth to compare optimistically confirmed slots (#33651)
The current getHealth mechanism checks a local accounts hash slot vs.
those of other nodes as specified by --known-validator. This is a
very coarse comparison given that the default for this value is 100
slots. More so, any nodes using a value larger than the default
(ie --incremental-snapshot-interval 500) will likely see getHealth
return status behind at some point.

Change the underlying mechanism of how health is computed. Instead of
using the accounts hash slots published in gossip, use the latest
optimistically confirmed slot from the cluster. Even when a node is
behind, it is able to observe cluster optimistically confirmed by slots
by viewing votes published in gossip.

Thus, the latest cluster optimistically confirmed slot can be compared
against the latest optimistically confirmed bank from replay to
determine health. This new comparison is much more granular, and not
needing to depend on individual known validators is also a plus.

docs/src/api/methods/_getHealth.mdx, after:

import {
  DocBlock,
  DocSideBySide,
  CodeParams,
  Parameter,
  Field,
  Values,
  CodeSnippets,
} from "../../../components/CodeDocBlock";

<DocBlock>

## getHealth

Returns the current health of the node. A healthy node is one that is within
`HEALTH_CHECK_SLOT_DISTANCE` slots of the latest cluster confirmed slot.

<DocSideBySide>
<CodeParams>

### Parameters:

**None**

### Result:

If the node is healthy: "ok"

If the node is unhealthy, a JSON RPC error response is returned. The specifics of the error response are **UNSTABLE** and may change in the future

</CodeParams>

<CodeSnippets>

### Code sample:

```bash
curl http://localhost:8899 -X POST -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '
  {"jsonrpc":"2.0","id":1, "method":"getHealth"}
'
```

### Response:

Healthy Result:

```json
{ "jsonrpc": "2.0", "result": "ok", "id": 1 }
```

Unhealthy Result (generic):

```json
{
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "error": {
    "code": -32005,
    "message": "Node is unhealthy",
    "data": {}
  },
  "id": 1
}
```

Unhealthy Result (if additional information is available)

```json
{
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "error": {
    "code": -32005,
    "message": "Node is behind by 42 slots",
    "data": {
      "numSlotsBehind": 42
    }
  },
  "id": 1
}
```

</CodeSnippets>
</DocSideBySide>
</DocBlock>
