docs/src/developing/programming-model/accounts.md, before:

---
title: "Accounts"
---

## Storing State between Transactions

If the program needs to store state between transactions, it does so using
_accounts_. Accounts are similar to files in operating systems such as Linux in
that they may hold arbitrary data that persists beyond
the lifetime of a program. Also like a file, an account includes metadata that
tells the runtime who is allowed to access the data and how.

Unlike a file, the account includes metadata for the lifetime of the file. That
lifetime is expressed by a number of fractional native
tokens called _lamports_. Accounts are held in validator memory and pay
["rent"](#rent) to stay there. Each validator periodically scans all accounts
and collects rent. Any account that drops to zero lamports is purged. Accounts
can also be marked [rent-exempt](#rent-exemption) if they contain a sufficient
number of lamports.

In the same way that a Linux user uses a path to look up a file, a Solana client
uses an _address_ to look up an account. The address is a 256-bit public key.

## Signers

Transactions include one or more digital [signatures](terminology.md#signature)
each corresponding to an account address referenced by the transaction. Each of these
addresses must be the public key of an ed25519 keypair, and the signature signifies
that the holder of the matching private key signed, and thus, "authorized" the transaction.
In this case, the account is referred to as a _signer_. Whether an account is a signer or not
is communicated to the program as part of the account's metadata. Programs can
then use that information to make authority decisions.

## Read-only

Transactions can [indicate](transactions.md#message-header-format) that some of
the accounts it references be treated as _read-only accounts_ in order to enable
parallel account processing between transactions. The runtime permits read-only
accounts to be read concurrently by multiple programs. If a program attempts to
modify a read-only account, the transaction is rejected by the runtime.

## Executable

If an account is marked "executable" in its metadata, then it is considered a
program which can be executed by including the account's public key in an
instruction's [program id](transactions.md#program-id). Accounts are marked as
executable during a successful program deployment process by the loader that
owns the account. When a program is deployed to the execution engine (SBF deployment),
the loader determines that the bytecode in the account's data is valid.
If so, the loader permanently marks the program account as executable.

If a program is marked as final (non-upgradeable), the runtime enforces that the
account's data (the program) is immutable. Through the upgradeable loader, it is
possible to upload a totally new program to an existing program address.

## Creating

To create an account, a client generates a _keypair_ and registers its public key
using the `SystemProgram::CreateAccount` instruction with a fixed
storage size in bytes preallocated.
The current maximum size of an account's data is 10 megabytes.

An account address can be any arbitrary 256 bit value, and there are mechanisms
for advanced users to create derived addresses
(`SystemProgram::CreateAccountWithSeed`,
[`Pubkey::CreateProgramAddress`](calling-between-programs.md#program-derived-addresses)).

Accounts that have never been created via the system program can also be passed
to programs. When an instruction references an account that hasn't been
previously created, the program will be passed an account with no data and zero lamports
that is owned by the system program.

Such newly created accounts reflect
whether they sign the transaction, and therefore, can be used as an
authority. Authorities in this context convey to the program that the holder of
the private key associated with the account's public key signed the transaction.
The account's public key may be known to the program or recorded in another
account, signifying some kind of ownership or authority over an asset or
operation the program controls or performs.

## Ownership and Assignment to Programs

A created account is initialized to be _owned_ by a built-in program called the
System program and is called a _system account_ aptly. An account includes
"owner" metadata. The owner is a program id. The runtime grants the program
write access to the account if its id matches the owner. For the case of the
System program, the runtime allows clients to transfer lamports and importantly
_assign_ account ownership, meaning changing the owner to a different program id. If
an account is not owned by a program, the program is only permitted to read its
data and credit the account.

## Verifying validity of unmodified, reference-only accounts

For security purposes, it is recommended that programs check the validity of any
account it reads, but does not modify.

This is because a malicious user
could create accounts with arbitrary data and then pass these accounts to the
program in place of valid accounts. The arbitrary data could be crafted in
a way that leads to unexpected or harmful program behavior.

The security model enforces that an account's data can only be modified by the
account's `Owner` program. This allows the program to trust that the data
is passed to them via accounts they own. The
runtime enforces this by rejecting any transaction containing a program that
attempts to write to an account it does not own.

If a program were to not check account validity, it might read an account
it thinks it owns, but doesn't. Anyone can
issue instructions to a program, and the runtime does not know that those
accounts are expected to be owned by the program.

To check an account's validity, the program should either check the account's
address against a known value, or check that the account is indeed owned
correctly (usually owned by the program itself).

One example is when programs use a sysvar account. Unless the program checks the
account's address or owner, it's impossible to be sure whether it's a real and
valid sysvar account merely by successful deserialization of the account's data.

Accordingly, the Solana SDK [checks the sysvar account's validity during
deserialization](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/blob/a95675a7ce1651f7b59443eb146b356bc4b3f374/sdk/program/src/sysvar/mod.rs#L65).
An alternative and safer way to read a sysvar is via the sysvar's [`get()`
function](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/blob/64bfc14a75671e4ec3fe969ded01a599645080eb/sdk/program/src/sysvar/mod.rs#L73)
which doesn't require these checks.

If the program always modifies the account in question, the address/owner check
isn't required because modifying an unowned account will be rejected by the runtime,
and the containing transaction will be thrown out.

## Rent

Keeping accounts alive on Solana incurs a storage cost called _rent_ because the
blockchain cluster must actively maintain the data to process any future transactions.
This is different from Bitcoin and Ethereum, where storing accounts doesn't
incur any costs.

Currently, all new accounts are required to be rent-exempt.

### Rent exemption

An account is considered rent-exempt if it holds at least 2 years worth of rent.
This is checked every time an account's balance is reduced, and transactions
that would reduce the balance to below the minimum amount will fail.

Program executable accounts are required by the runtime to be rent-exempt to
avoid being purged.

Note: Use the [`getMinimumBalanceForRentExemption` RPC
endpoint](developing/clients/jsonrpc-api.md#getminimumbalanceforrentexemption) to calculate the
minimum balance for a particular account size. The following calculation is
illustrative only.

For example, a program executable with the size of 15,000 bytes requires a
balance of 105,290,880 lamports (=~ 0.105 SOL) to be rent-exempt:

```text
105,290,880 = 19.055441478439427 (fee rate) * (128 + 15_000)(account size including metadata) * ((365.25/2) * 2)(epochs in 2 years)
```

Rent can also be estimated via the [`solana rent` CLI subcommand](cli/usage.md#solana-rent)

```text
$ solana rent 15000
Rent per byte-year: 0.00000348 SOL
Rent per epoch: 0.000288276 SOL
Rent-exempt minimum: 0.10529088 SOL
```

Note: Rest assured that, should the storage rent rate need to be increased at some
point in the future, steps will be taken to ensure that accounts that are rent-exempt
before the increase will remain rent-exempt afterwards

Commit message:

Adjusts docs about changing the data, size and balance of accounts. (#29007)

docs/src/developing/programming-model/accounts.md, after:

---
title: "Accounts"
---

## Storing State between Transactions

If the program needs to store state between transactions, it does so using
_accounts_. Accounts are similar to files in operating systems such as Linux in
that they may hold arbitrary data that persists beyond
the lifetime of a program. Also like a file, an account includes metadata that
tells the runtime who is allowed to access the data and how.

Unlike a file, the account includes metadata for the lifetime of the file. That
lifetime is expressed by a number of fractional native
tokens called _lamports_. Accounts are held in validator memory and pay
["rent"](#rent) to stay there. Each validator periodically scans all accounts
and collects rent. Any account that drops to zero lamports is purged. Accounts
can also be marked [rent-exempt](#rent-exemption) if they contain a sufficient
number of lamports.

In the same way that a Linux user uses a path to look up a file, a Solana client
uses an _address_ to look up an account. The address is a 256-bit public key.

## Signers

Transactions include one or more digital [signatures](terminology.md#signature)
each corresponding to an account address referenced by the transaction. Each of these
addresses must be the public key of an ed25519 keypair, and the signature signifies
that the holder of the matching private key signed, and thus, "authorized" the transaction.
In this case, the account is referred to as a _signer_. Whether an account is a signer or not
is communicated to the program as part of the account's metadata. Programs can
then use that information to make authority decisions.

## Read-only

Transactions can [indicate](transactions.md#message-header-format) that some of
the accounts it references be treated as _read-only accounts_ in order to enable
parallel account processing between transactions. The runtime permits read-only
accounts to be read concurrently by multiple programs. If a program attempts to
modify a read-only account, the transaction is rejected by the runtime.

## Executable

If an account is marked "executable" in its metadata, then it is considered a
program which can be executed by including the account's public key in an
instruction's [program id](transactions.md#program-id). Accounts are marked as
executable during a successful program deployment process by the loader that
owns the account. When a program is deployed to the execution engine (SBF deployment),
the loader determines that the bytecode in the account's data is valid.
If so, the loader permanently marks the program account as executable.

If a program is marked as final (non-upgradeable), the runtime enforces that the
account's data (the program) is immutable. Through the upgradeable loader, it is
possible to upload a totally new program to an existing program address.

## Creating

To create an account, a client generates a _keypair_ and registers its public key
using the `SystemProgram::CreateAccount` instruction with a fixed
storage size in bytes preallocated.
The current maximum size of an account's data is 10 MiB, which can be changed
(increased or decreased) at a rate over all accounts of 20 MiB per transaction,
and the size can be increased by 10 KiB per account and per instruction.

An account address can be any arbitrary 256 bit value, and there are mechanisms
for advanced users to create derived addresses
(`SystemProgram::CreateAccountWithSeed`,
[`Pubkey::CreateProgramAddress`](calling-between-programs.md#program-derived-addresses)).

Accounts that have never been created via the system program can also be passed
to programs. When an instruction references an account that hasn't been
previously created, the program will be passed an account with no data and zero lamports
that is owned by the system program.

Such newly created accounts reflect
whether they sign the transaction, and therefore, can be used as an
authority. Authorities in this context convey to the program that the holder of
the private key associated with the account's public key signed the transaction.
The account's public key may be known to the program or recorded in another
account, signifying some kind of ownership or authority over an asset or
operation the program controls or performs.

## Ownership and Assignment to Programs

A created account is initialized to be _owned_ by a built-in program called the
System program and is called a _system account_ aptly. An account includes
"owner" metadata. The owner is a program id. The runtime grants the program
write access to the account if its id matches the owner. For the case of the
System program, the runtime allows clients to transfer lamports and importantly
_assign_ account ownership, meaning changing the owner to a different program id. If
an account is not owned by a program, the program is only permitted to read its
data and credit the account.

## Verifying validity of unmodified, reference-only accounts

For security purposes, it is recommended that programs check the validity of any
account it reads, but does not modify.

This is because a malicious user
could create accounts with arbitrary data and then pass these accounts to the
program in place of valid accounts. The arbitrary data could be crafted in
a way that leads to unexpected or harmful program behavior.

The security model enforces that an account's data can only be modified by the
account's `Owner` program. This allows the program to trust that the data
is passed to them via accounts they own. The
runtime enforces this by rejecting any transaction containing a program that
attempts to write to an account it does not own.

If a program were to not check account validity, it might read an account
it thinks it owns, but doesn't. Anyone can
issue instructions to a program, and the runtime does not know that those
accounts are expected to be owned by the program.

To check an account's validity, the program should either check the account's
address against a known value, or check that the account is indeed owned
correctly (usually owned by the program itself).

One example is when programs use a sysvar account. Unless the program checks the
account's address or owner, it's impossible to be sure whether it's a real and
valid sysvar account merely by successful deserialization of the account's data.

Accordingly, the Solana SDK [checks the sysvar account's validity during
deserialization](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/blob/a95675a7ce1651f7b59443eb146b356bc4b3f374/sdk/program/src/sysvar/mod.rs#L65).
An alternative and safer way to read a sysvar is via the sysvar's [`get()`
function](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/blob/64bfc14a75671e4ec3fe969ded01a599645080eb/sdk/program/src/sysvar/mod.rs#L73)
which doesn't require these checks.

If the program always modifies the account in question, the address/owner check
isn't required because modifying an unowned account will be rejected by the runtime,
and the containing transaction will be thrown out.

## Rent

Keeping accounts alive on Solana incurs a storage cost called _rent_ because the
blockchain cluster must actively maintain the data to process any future transactions.
This is different from Bitcoin and Ethereum, where storing accounts doesn't
incur any costs.

Currently, all new accounts are required to be rent-exempt.

### Rent exemption

An account is considered rent-exempt if it holds at least 2 years worth of rent.
This is checked every time an account's balance is reduced, and transactions
that would reduce the balance to below the minimum amount will fail.

Program executable accounts are required by the runtime to be rent-exempt to
avoid being purged.

Note: Use the [`getMinimumBalanceForRentExemption` RPC
endpoint](developing/clients/jsonrpc-api.md#getminimumbalanceforrentexemption) to calculate the
minimum balance for a particular account size. The following calculation is
illustrative only.

For example, a program executable with the size of 15,000 bytes requires a
balance of 105,290,880 lamports (=~ 0.105 SOL) to be rent-exempt:

```text
105,290,880 = 19.055441478439427 (fee rate) * (128 + 15_000)(account size including metadata) * ((365.25/2) * 2)(epochs in 2 years)
```

Rent can also be estimated via the [`solana rent` CLI subcommand](cli/usage.md#solana-rent)

```text
$ solana rent 15000
Rent per byte-year: 0.00000348 SOL
Rent per epoch: 0.000288276 SOL
Rent-exempt minimum: 0.10529088 SOL
```

Note: Rest assured that, should the storage rent rate need to be increased at some
point in the future, steps will be taken to ensure that accounts that are rent-exempt
before the increase will remain rent-exempt afterwards
