---
title: Cross-Program Invocation
---

## Problem

In today's implementation, a client can create a transaction that modifies two
accounts, each owned by a separate on-chain program:

```rust,ignore
let message = Message::new(vec![
    token_instruction::pay(&alice_pubkey),
    acme_instruction::launch_missiles(&bob_pubkey),
]);
client.send_and_confirm_message(&[&alice_keypair, &bob_keypair], &message);
```

However, the current implementation does not allow the `acme` program to
conveniently invoke `token` instructions on the client's behalf:

```rust,ignore
let message = Message::new(vec![
    acme_instruction::pay_and_launch_missiles(&alice_pubkey, &bob_pubkey),
]);
client.send_and_confirm_message(&[&alice_keypair, &bob_keypair], &message);
```

Currently, there is no way to create instruction `pay_and_launch_missiles` that
executes `token_instruction::pay` from the `acme` program. A possible workaround
is to extend the `acme` program with the implementation of the `token` program
and create `token` accounts with `ACME_PROGRAM_ID`, which the `acme` program is
permitted to modify. With that workaround, `acme` can modify token-like accounts
created by the `acme` program, but not token accounts created by the `token`
program.

## Solution

The goal of this design is to modify Solana's runtime such that an on-chain
program can invoke an instruction from another program.

Given two on-chain programs `token` and `acme`, each implementing instructions
`pay()` and `launch_missiles()` respectively, we would ideally like to implement
the `acme` module with a call to a function defined in the `token` module:

```rust,ignore
mod acme {
    use token;

    fn launch_missiles(keyed_accounts: &[KeyedAccount]) -> Result<()> {
        ...
    }

    fn pay_and_launch_missiles(keyed_accounts: &[KeyedAccount]) -> Result<()> {
        token::pay(&keyed_accounts[1..])?;

        launch_missiles(keyed_accounts)?;
    }
```

The above code would require that the `token` crate be dynamically linked so
that a custom linker could intercept calls and validate accesses to
`keyed_accounts`. Even though the client intends to modify both `token` and
`acme` accounts, only `token` program is permitted to modify the `token`
account, and only the `acme` program is allowed to modify the `acme` account.

Backing off from that ideal direct cross-program call, a slightly more verbose
solution is to allow `acme` to invoke `token` by issuing a token instruction via
the runtime.

```rust,ignore
mod acme {
    use token_instruction;

    fn launch_missiles(keyed_accounts: &[KeyedAccount]) -> Result<()> {
        ...
    }

    fn pay_and_launch_missiles(keyed_accounts: &[KeyedAccount]) -> Result<()> {
        let alice_pubkey = keyed_accounts[1].key;
        let instruction = token_instruction::pay(&alice_pubkey);
        invoke(&instruction, accounts)?;

        launch_missiles(keyed_accounts)?;
    }
```

`invoke()` is built into Solana's runtime and is responsible for routing the
given instruction to the `token` program via the instruction's `program_id`
field.

Before invoking `pay()`, the runtime must ensure that `acme` didn't modify any
accounts owned by `token`. It does this by applying the runtime's policy to the
current state of the accounts at the time `acme` calls `invoke` vs. the initial
state of the accounts at the beginning of the `acme`'s instruction. After
`pay()` completes, the runtime must again ensure that `token` didn't modify any
accounts owned by `acme` by again applying the runtime's policy, but this time
with the `token` program ID. Lastly, after `pay_and_launch_missiles()`
completes, the runtime must apply the runtime policy one more time, where it
normally would, but using all updated `pre_*` variables. If executing
`pay_and_launch_missiles()` up to `pay()` made no invalid account changes,
`pay()` made no invalid changes, and executing from `pay()` until
`pay_and_launch_missiles()` returns made no invalid changes, then the runtime
can transitively assume `pay_and_launch_missiles()` as whole made no invalid
account changes, and therefore commit all these account modifications.

### Instructions that require privileges

The runtime uses the privileges granted to the caller program to determine what
privileges can be extended to the callee. Privileges in this context refer to
signers and writable accounts. For example, if the instruction the caller is
processing contains a signer or writable account, then the caller can invoke an
instruction that also contains that signer and/or writable account.

This privilege extension relies on the fact that programs are immutable. In the
case of the `acme` program, the runtime can safely treat the transaction's
signature as a signature of a `token` instruction. When the runtime sees the
`token` instruction references `alice_pubkey`, it looks up the key in the `acme`
instruction to see if that key corresponds to a signed account. In this case, it
does and thereby authorizes the `token` program to modify Alice's account.

### Program signed accounts

Programs can issue instructions that contain signed accounts that were not
signed in the original transaction by using [Program derived
addresses](program-derived-addresses.md).

To sign an account with program derived addresses, a program may
`invoke_signed()`.

```rust,ignore
        invoke_signed(
            &instruction,
            accounts,
            &[&["First addresses seed"],
              &["Second addresses first seed", "Second addresses second seed"]],
        )?;
```

### Call Depth

Cross-program invocations allow programs to invoke other programs directly but
the depth is constrained currently to 4.

### Reentrancy

Reentrancy is currently limited to direct self recursion capped at a fixed
depth. This restriction prevents situations where a program might invoke another
from an intermediary state without the knowledge that it might later be called
back into. Direct recursion gives the program full control of its state at the
point that it gets called back.
