docs/src/developing/programming-model/transactions.md, before:

---
title: "Transactions"
---

Program execution begins with a [transaction](terminology.md#transaction) being
submitted to the cluster. The Solana runtime will execute a program to process
each of the [instructions](terminology.md#instruction) contained in the
transaction, in order, and atomically.

## Anatomy of a Transaction

This section covers the binary format of a transaction.

### Transaction Format

A transaction contains a [compact-array](#compact-array-format) of signatures,
followed by a [message](#message-format). Each item in the signatures array is
a [digital signature](#signature-format) of the given message. The Solana
runtime verifies that the number of signatures matches the number in the first
8 bits of the [message header](#message-header-format). It also verifies that
each signature was signed by the private key corresponding to the public key at
the same index in the message's account addresses array.

#### Signature Format

Each digital signature is in the ed25519 binary format and consumes 64 bytes.

### Message Format

A message contains a [header](#message-header-format), followed by a
compact-array of [account addresses](#account-addresses-format), followed by a
recent [blockhash](#blockhash-format), followed by a compact-array of
[instructions](#instruction-format).

#### Message Header Format

The message header contains three unsigned 8-bit values. The first value is the
number of required signatures in the containing transaction. The second value
is the number of those corresponding account addresses that are read-only. The
third value in the message header is the number of read-only account addresses
not requiring signatures.

#### Account Addresses Format

The addresses that require signatures appear at the beginning of the account
address array, with addresses requesting read-write access first, and read-only
accounts following. The addresses that do not require signatures follow the
addresses that do, again with read-write accounts first and read-only accounts
following.

#### Blockhash Format

A blockhash contains a 32-byte SHA-256 hash. It is used to indicate when a
client last observed the ledger. Validators will reject transactions when the
blockhash is too old.

### Instruction Format

An instruction contains a program id index, followed by a compact-array of
account address indexes, followed by a compact-array of opaque 8-bit data. The
program id index is used to identify an on-chain program that can interpret the
opaque data. The program id index is an unsigned 8-bit index to an account
address in the message's array of account addresses. The account address
indexes are each an unsigned 8-bit index into that same array.

### Compact-Array Format

A compact-array is serialized as the array length, followed by each array item.
The array length is a special multi-byte encoding called compact-u16.

#### Compact-u16 Format

A compact-u16 is a multi-byte encoding of 16 bits. The first byte contains the
lower 7 bits of the value in its lower 7 bits. If the value is above 0x7f, the
high bit is set and the next 7 bits of the value are placed into the lower 7
bits of a second byte. If the value is above 0x3fff, the high bit is set and
the remaining 2 bits of the value are placed into the lower 2 bits of a third
byte.

### Account Address Format

An account address is 32-bytes of arbitrary data. When the address requires a
digital signature, the runtime interprets it as the public key of an ed25519
keypair.

## Instructions

Each [instruction](terminology.md#instruction) specifies a single program, a
subset of the transaction's accounts that should be passed to the program, and a
data byte array that is passed to the program. The program interprets the data
array and operates on the accounts specified by the instructions. The program
can return successfully, or with an error code. An error return causes the
entire transaction to fail immediately.

Programs typically provide helper functions to construct instructions they
support. For example, the system program provides the following Rust helper to
construct a
[`SystemInstruction::CreateAccount`](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/blob/6606590b8132e56dab9e60b3f7d20ba7412a736c/sdk/program/src/system_instruction.rs#L63)
instruction:

```rust
pub fn create_account(
    from_pubkey: &Pubkey,
    to_pubkey: &Pubkey,
    lamports: u64,
    space: u64,
    owner: &Pubkey,
) -> Instruction {
    let account_metas = vec![
        AccountMeta::new(*from_pubkey, true),
        AccountMeta::new(*to_pubkey, true),
    ];
    Instruction::new_with_bincode(
        system_program::id(),
        &SystemInstruction::CreateAccount {
            lamports,
            space,
            owner: *owner,
        },
        account_metas,
    )
}
```

Which can be found here:

https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/blob/6606590b8132e56dab9e60b3f7d20ba7412a736c/sdk/program/src/system_instruction.rs#L220

### Program Id

The instruction's [program id](terminology.md#program-id) specifies which
program will process this instruction. The program's account's owner specifies
which loader should be used to load and execute the program, and the data
contains information about how the runtime should execute the program.

In the case of [on-chain SBF programs](developing/on-chain-programs/overview.md),
the owner is the SBF Loader and the account data holds the BPF bytecode. Program
accounts are permanently marked as executable by the loader once they are
successfully deployed. The runtime will reject transactions that specify programs
that are not executable.

Unlike on-chain programs, [Native Programs](developing/runtime-facilities/programs.md)
are handled differently in that they are built directly into the Solana runtime.

### Accounts

The accounts referenced by an instruction represent on-chain state and serve as
both the inputs and outputs of a program. More information about accounts can be
found in the [Accounts](accounts.md) section.

### Instruction data

Each instruction carries a general purpose byte array that is passed to the
program along with the accounts. The contents of the instruction data is program
specific and typically used to convey what operations the program should
perform, and any additional information those operations may need above and
beyond what the accounts contain.

Programs are free to specify how information is encoded into the instruction
data byte array. The choice of how data is encoded should consider the
overhead of decoding, since that step is performed by the program on-chain. It's
been observed that some common encodings (Rust's bincode for example) are very
inefficient.

The [Solana Program Library's Token
program](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana-program-library/tree/master/token)
gives one example of how instruction data can be encoded efficiently, but note
that this method only supports fixed sized types. Token utilizes the
[Pack](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/blob/master/sdk/program/src/program_pack.rs)
trait to encode/decode instruction data for both token instructions as well as
token account states.

### Multiple instructions in a single transaction

A transaction can contain instructions in any order. This means a malicious
user could craft transactions that may pose instructions in an order that the
program has not been protected against. Programs should be hardened to properly
and safely handle any possible instruction sequence.

One not so obvious example is account deinitialization. Some programs may
attempt to deinitialize an account by setting its lamports to zero, with the
assumption that the runtime will delete the account. This assumption may be
valid between transactions, but it is not between instructions or cross-program
invocations. To harden against this, the program should also explicitly zero out the
account's data.

An example of where this could be a problem is if a token program, upon
transferring the token out of an account, sets the account's lamports to zero,
assuming it will be deleted by the runtime. If the program does not zero out the
account's data, a malicious user could trail this instruction with another that
transfers the tokens a second time.

## Signatures

Each transaction explicitly lists all account public keys referenced by the
transaction's instructions. A subset of those public keys are each accompanied
by a transaction signature. Those signatures signal on-chain programs that the
account holder has authorized the transaction. Typically, the program uses the
authorization to permit debiting the account or modifying its data. More
information about how the authorization is communicated to a program can be
found in [Accounts](accounts.md#signers)

## Recent Blockhash

A transaction includes a recent [blockhash](../../terminology.md#blockhash) to prevent
duplication and to give transactions lifetimes. Any transaction that is
completely identical to a previous one is rejected, so adding a newer blockhash
allows multiple transactions to repeat the exact same action. Transactions also
have lifetimes that are defined by the blockhash, as any transaction whose
blockhash is too old will be rejected.

Commit message:

[docs] Updated transactions overview page (#29345)
fix: added broad overview

docs/src/developing/programming-model/transactions.md, after:

---
title: "Transactions"
description: "A Solana transaction consists of one or more instructions, an array of accounts to read and write data from, and one or more signatures."
---

On the Solana blockchain, program execution begins with a [transaction](./../../terminology.md#transaction) being submitted to the cluster. With each transaction consisting of one or many [instructions](./../../terminology.md#instruction), the runtime will process each of the instructions contained within the transaction, in order, and atomically. If any part of an instruction fails, then the entire transaction will fail.

## Overview of a Transaction

On Solana, clients update the runtime (for example, debiting an account) by submitting a transaction to the cluster.

This transaction consists of three parts:

- one or more instructions
- an array of accounts to read or write from
- one or more signatures

An [instruction](./../../terminology.md#instruction) is the smallest execution logic on Solana. Instructions are basically a call to update the global Solana state. Instructions invoke programs that make calls to the Solana runtime to update the state (for example, calling the token program to transfer tokens from your account to another account).

[Programs](./../intro/programs.md) on Solana don’t store data/state; rather, data/state is stored in accounts.

[Signatures](./../../terminology.md#signature) verify that we have the authority to read or write data to the accounts that we list.

## Anatomy of a Transaction

This section covers the binary format of a transaction.

### Transaction Format

A transaction contains a [compact-array](#compact-array-format) of signatures,
followed by a [message](#message-format). Each item in the signatures array is
a [digital signature](#signature-format) of the given message. The Solana
runtime verifies that the number of signatures matches the number in the first
8 bits of the [message header](#message-header-format). It also verifies that
each signature was signed by the private key corresponding to the public key at
the same index in the message's account addresses array.

#### Signature Format

Each digital signature is in the ed25519 binary format and consumes 64 bytes.

### Message Format

A message contains a [header](#message-header-format), followed by a
compact-array of [account addresses](#account-addresses-format), followed by a
recent [blockhash](#blockhash-format), followed by a compact-array of
[instructions](#instruction-format).

#### Message Header Format

The message header contains three unsigned 8-bit values. The first value is the
number of required signatures in the containing transaction. The second value
is the number of those corresponding account addresses that are read-only. The
third value in the message header is the number of read-only account addresses
not requiring signatures.

#### Account Addresses Format

The addresses that require signatures appear at the beginning of the account
address array, with addresses requesting read-write access first, and read-only
accounts following. The addresses that do not require signatures follow the
addresses that do, again with read-write accounts first and read-only accounts
following.

#### Blockhash Format

A blockhash contains a 32-byte SHA-256 hash. It is used to indicate when a
client last observed the ledger. Validators will reject transactions when the
blockhash is too old.

### Instruction Format

An instruction contains a program id index, followed by a compact-array of
account address indexes, followed by a compact-array of opaque 8-bit data. The
program id index is used to identify an on-chain program that can interpret the
opaque data. The program id index is an unsigned 8-bit index to an account
address in the message's array of account addresses. The account address
indexes are each an unsigned 8-bit index into that same array.

### Compact-Array Format

A compact-array is serialized as the array length, followed by each array item.
The array length is a special multi-byte encoding called compact-u16.

#### Compact-u16 Format

A compact-u16 is a multi-byte encoding of 16 bits. The first byte contains the
lower 7 bits of the value in its lower 7 bits. If the value is above 0x7f, the
high bit is set and the next 7 bits of the value are placed into the lower 7
bits of a second byte. If the value is above 0x3fff, the high bit is set and
the remaining 2 bits of the value are placed into the lower 2 bits of a third
byte.

### Account Address Format

An account address is 32-bytes of arbitrary data. When the address requires a
digital signature, the runtime interprets it as the public key of an ed25519
keypair.

## Instructions

Each [instruction](terminology.md#instruction) specifies a single program, a
subset of the transaction's accounts that should be passed to the program, and a
data byte array that is passed to the program. The program interprets the data
array and operates on the accounts specified by the instructions. The program
can return successfully, or with an error code. An error return causes the
entire transaction to fail immediately.

Programs typically provide helper functions to construct instructions they
support. For example, the system program provides the following Rust helper to
construct a
[`SystemInstruction::CreateAccount`](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/blob/6606590b8132e56dab9e60b3f7d20ba7412a736c/sdk/program/src/system_instruction.rs#L63)
instruction:

```rust
pub fn create_account(
    from_pubkey: &Pubkey,
    to_pubkey: &Pubkey,
    lamports: u64,
    space: u64,
    owner: &Pubkey,
) -> Instruction {
    let account_metas = vec![
        AccountMeta::new(*from_pubkey, true),
        AccountMeta::new(*to_pubkey, true),
    ];
    Instruction::new_with_bincode(
        system_program::id(),
        &SystemInstruction::CreateAccount {
            lamports,
            space,
            owner: *owner,
        },
        account_metas,
    )
}
```

Which can be found here:

https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/blob/6606590b8132e56dab9e60b3f7d20ba7412a736c/sdk/program/src/system_instruction.rs#L220

### Program Id

The instruction's [program id](./../../terminology.md#program-id) specifies which
program will process this instruction. The program's account's owner specifies
which loader should be used to load and execute the program, and the data
contains information about how the runtime should execute the program.

In the case of [on-chain SBF programs](./../on-chain-programs/overview.md),
the owner is the SBF Loader and the account data holds the BPF bytecode. Program
accounts are permanently marked as executable by the loader once they are
successfully deployed. The runtime will reject transactions that specify programs
that are not executable.

Unlike on-chain programs, [Native Programs](../runtime-facilities/programs.md)
are handled differently in that they are built directly into the Solana runtime.

### Accounts

The accounts referenced by an instruction represent on-chain state and serve as
both the inputs and outputs of a program. More information about accounts can be
found in the [Accounts](./accounts.md) section.

### Instruction data

Each instruction carries a general purpose byte array that is passed to the
program along with the accounts. The contents of the instruction data is program
specific and typically used to convey what operations the program should
perform, and any additional information those operations may need above and
beyond what the accounts contain.

Programs are free to specify how information is encoded into the instruction
data byte array. The choice of how data is encoded should consider the
overhead of decoding, since that step is performed by the program on-chain. It's
been observed that some common encodings (Rust's bincode for example) are very
inefficient.

The [Solana Program Library's Token
program](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana-program-library/tree/master/token)
gives one example of how instruction data can be encoded efficiently, but note
that this method only supports fixed sized types. Token utilizes the
[Pack](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/blob/master/sdk/program/src/program_pack.rs)
trait to encode/decode instruction data for both token instructions as well as
token account states.

### Multiple instructions in a single transaction

A transaction can contain instructions in any order. This means a malicious
user could craft transactions that may pose instructions in an order that the
program has not been protected against. Programs should be hardened to properly
and safely handle any possible instruction sequence.

One not so obvious example is account deinitialization. Some programs may
attempt to deinitialize an account by setting its lamports to zero, with the
assumption that the runtime will delete the account. This assumption may be
valid between transactions, but it is not between instructions or cross-program
invocations. To harden against this, the program should also explicitly zero out the
account's data.

An example of where this could be a problem is if a token program, upon
transferring the token out of an account, sets the account's lamports to zero,
assuming it will be deleted by the runtime. If the program does not zero out the
account's data, a malicious user could trail this instruction with another that
transfers the tokens a second time.

## Signatures

Each transaction explicitly lists all account public keys referenced by the
transaction's instructions. A subset of those public keys are each accompanied
by a transaction signature. Those signatures signal on-chain programs that the
account holder has authorized the transaction. Typically, the program uses the
authorization to permit debiting the account or modifying its data. More
information about how the authorization is communicated to a program can be
found in [Accounts](./accounts.md#signers)

## Recent Blockhash

A transaction includes a recent [blockhash](../../terminology.md#blockhash) to prevent
duplication and to give transactions lifetimes. Any transaction that is
completely identical to a previous one is rejected, so adding a newer blockhash
allows multiple transactions to repeat the exact same action. Transactions also
have lifetimes that are defined by the blockhash, as any transaction whose
blockhash is too old will be rejected.
