docs/src/getstarted/hello-world.md, before:

---
title: "Hello World Quickstart Guide"
description: 'This "hello world" quickstart guide will demonstrate how to setup, build, and deploy your first Solana program in your browser with Solana Playground.'
keywords:
  - playground
  - solana pg
  - on chain
  - rust
  - native program
  - tutorial
  - intro to solana development
  - blockchain developer
  - blockchain tutorial
  - web3 developer
---

For this "hello world" quickstart guide, we will use [Solana Playground](https://beta.solpg.io), a browser based IDE to develop and deploy our Solana program. To use it, you do **NOT** have to install any software on your computer. Simply open Solana Playground in your browser of choice, and you are ready to write and deploy Solana programs.

## What you will learn

- How to get started with Solana Playground
- How to create a Solana wallet on Playground
- How to program a basic Solana program in Rust
- How to build and deploy a Solana Rust program
- How to interact with your on chain program using JavaScript

## Using Solana Playground

[Solana Playground](https://beta.solpg.io) is browser based application that will let you write, build, and deploy on chain Solana programs. All from your browser. No installation needed.

It is a great developer resource for getting started with Solana development, especially on Windows.

### Import our example project

In a new tab in your browser, open our example "_Hello World_" project on Solana Playground: https://beta.solpg.io/6314a69688a7fca897ad7d1d

Next, import the project into your local workspace by clicking the "**Import**" icon and naming your project `hello_world`.

![Import the get started Solana program on Solana Playground](/img/quickstarts/solana-get-started-import-on-playground.png)

> If you do **not** import the program into **your** Solana Playground, then you will **not** be able to make changes to the code. But you **will** still be able to build and deploy the code to a Solana cluster.

### Create a Playground wallet

Normally with [local development](./local.md), you will need to create a file system wallet for use with the Solana CLI. But with the Solana Playground, you only need to click a few buttons to create a browser based wallet.

> **Note:**
> Your _Playground Wallet_ will be saved in your browser's local storage. Clearing your browser cache will remove your saved wallet. When creating a new wallet, you will have the option to save a local copy of your wallet's keypair file.

Click on the red status indicator button at the bottom left of the screen, (optionally) save your wallet's keypair file to your computer for backup, then click "**Continue**".

After your Playground Wallet is created, you will notice the bottom of the window now states your wallet's address, your SOL balance, and the Solana cluster you are connected to (Devnet is usually the default/recommended, but a "localhost" [test validator](./local.md) is also acceptable).

## Create a Solana program

The code for your Rust based Solana program will live in your `src/lib.rs` file. Inside `src/lib.rs` you will be able to import your Rust crates and define your logic. Open your `src/lib.rs` file within Solana Playground.

### Import the `solana_program` crate

At the top of `lib.rs`, we import the `solana-program` crate and bring our needed items into the local namespace:

```rust
use solana_program::{
    account_info::AccountInfo,
    entrypoint,
    entrypoint::ProgramResult,
    pubkey::Pubkey,
    msg,
};
```

### Write your program logic

Every Solana program must define an `entrypoint` that tells the Solana runtime where to start executing your on chain code. Your program's [entrypoint](../developing/on-chain-programs/developing-rust#program-entrypoint) should provide a public function named `process_instruction`:

```rust
// declare and export the program's entrypoint
entrypoint!(process_instruction);

// program entrypoint's implementation
pub fn process_instruction(
    program_id: &Pubkey,
    accounts: &[AccountInfo],
    instruction_data: &[u8]
) -> ProgramResult {
    // log a message to the blockchain
    msg!("Hello, world!");

    // gracefully exit the program
    Ok(())
}
```

Every on chain program should return the `Ok` [result enum](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/result/) with a value of `()`. This tells the Solana runtime that your program executed successfully without errors.

Our program above will simply [log a message](../developing/on-chain-programs/debugging#logging) of "_Hello, world!_" to the blockchain cluster, then gracefully exit with `Ok(())`.

### Build your program

On the left sidebar, select the "**Build & Deploy**" tab. Next, click the "Build" button.

If you look at the Playground's terminal, you should see your Solana program begin to compile. Once complete, you will see a success message.

![Viewing a successful build of your Rust based program](/img/quickstarts/solana-get-started-successful-build.png)

> Note:
> You may receive _warning_ when your program is compiled due to unused variables. Don't worry, these warning will not affect your build. They are due to our very simple program not using all the variables we declared in the `process_instruction` function.

### Deploy your program

You can click the "Deploy" button to deploy your first program to the Solana blockchain. Specifically to your selected cluster (e.g. Devnet, Testnet, etc).

After each deployment, you will see your Playground Wallet balance change. By default, Solana Playground will automatically request SOL airdrops on your behalf to ensure your wallet has enough SOL to cover the cost of deployment.

> Note:
> If you need more SOL, you can airdrop more by typing airdrop command in the playground terminal:

```sh
solana airdrop 2
```

![Build and deploy your Solana program to the blockchain](/img/quickstarts/solana-get-started-build-and-deploy.png)

### Find your program id

When executing a program using [web3.js](../developing/clients/javascript-reference.md) or from [another Solana program](../developing/programming-model/calling-between-programs.md), you will need to provide the `program id` (aka public address of your program).

Inside Solana Playground's **Build & Deploy** sidebar, you can find your `program id` under the **Program Credentials** dropdown.

#### Congratulations!

You have successfully setup, built, and deployed a Solana program using the Rust language directly in your browser. Next, we will demonstrate how to interact with your on chain program.

## Interact with your on chain program

Once you have successfully deployed a Solana program to the blockchain, you will want to be able to interact with that program.

Like most developers creating dApps and websites, we will interact with our on chain program using JavaScript. Specifically, will use the open source [NPM package](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@solana/web3.js) `@solana/web3.js` to aid in our client application.

> **NOTE:**
> This web3.js package is an abstraction layer on top of the [JSON RPC API](./../developing/clients/jsonrpc-api.md) that reduced the need for rewriting common boilerplate, helping to simplify your client side application code.

### Initialize client

We will be using Solana Playground for the client generation. Create a client folder by running `run` command in the playground terminal:

```bash
run
```

We have created `client` folder and a default `client.ts`. This is where we will work for the rest of our `hello world` program.

### Playground globals

In playground, there are many utilities that are globally available for us to use without installing or setting up anything. Most important ones for our `hello world` program are `web3` for `@solana/web3.js` and `pg` for Solana Playground utilities.

> Note:
> You can go over all of the available globals by pressing `CTRL+SPACE` (or `CMD+SPACE` on macOS) inside the editor.

### Call the program

To execute your on chain program, you must send a [transaction](../developing/programming-model/transactions.md) to it. Each transaction submitted to the Solana blockchain contains a listing of instructions (and the program's that instruction will interact with).

Here we create a new transaction and add a single `instruction` to it:

```js
// create an empty transaction
const transaction = new web3.Transaction();

// add a hello world program instruction to the transaction
transaction.add(
  new web3.TransactionInstruction({
    keys: [],
    programId: new web3.PublicKey(pg.PROGRAM_ID),
  }),
);
```

Each `instruction` must include all the keys involved in the operation and the program ID we want to execute. In this example `keys` is empty because our program only logs `hello world` and doesn't need any accounts.

With our transaction created, we can submit it to the cluster:

```js
// send the transaction to the Solana cluster
console.log("Sending transaction...");
const txHash = await web3.sendAndConfirmTransaction(
  pg.connection,
  transaction,
  [pg.wallet.keypair],
);
console.log("Transaction sent with hash:", txHash);
```

> Note:
> The first signer in the signers array is the transaction fee payer by default. We are signing with our keypair `pg.wallet.keypair`.

### Run the application

With the client application written, you can run the code via the same `run` command.

Once your application completes, you will see output similar to this:

```sh
Running client...
  client.ts:
    My address: GkxZRRNPfaUfL9XdYVfKF3rWjMcj5md6b6mpRoWpURwP
    My balance: 5.7254472 SOL
    Sending transaction...
    Transaction sent with hash: 2Ra7D9JoqeNsax9HmNq6MB4qWtKPGcLwoqQ27mPYsPFh3h8wignvKB2mWZVvdzCyTnp7CEZhfg2cEpbavib9mCcq
```

### Get transaction logs

We will be using `solana-cli` directly in playground to get the information about any transaction:

```sh
solana confirm -v <TRANSACTION_HASH>
```

Change `<TRANSACTION_HASH>` with the hash you received from calling `hello world` program.

You should see `Hello, world!` in the **Log Messages** section of the output. 🎉

#### Congratulations!!!

You have now written a client application for your on chain program. You are now a Solana developer!

PS: Try to update your program's message then re-build, re-deploy, and re-execute your program.

## Next steps

See the links below to learn more about writing Solana programs:

- [Setup your local development environment](./local.md)
- [Overview of writing Solana programs](../developing/on-chain-programs/overview)
- [Learn more about developing Solana programs with Rust](../developing/on-chain-programs/developing-Rust)
- [Debugging on chain programs](../developing/on-chain-programs/debugging)

Commit message:

[docs] new JSON RPC API docs format (#29772)
* feat: added api page

* fix: api redirects

* feat: websocket page and partials

* feat: deprectated partials

* feat: http method partials

* fix: more deprecated partials

* feat: codeblock component and styles

* feat: api http methods page

* feat: sidebar

* refactor: proposal api links

* refactor: internal linking

* refactor: more internal links

* refactor: internal link and note cards

* refactor: local links

* refactor: local links and auto save prettier

* feat: added numNonVoteTransaction data details

* fix: updated getRecentPrioritizationFees

* fix: corrected wording

* fix: version typo

* fix: commitment links

* fix: parsed response links

* fix: dangling links

* refactor: filter criteria

* docs: removed jsonrpc-api.md file

* fix: dangling links

* style: removed whitespaces for CI

* style: removed whitespace

* style: fixed whitespaces

docs/src/getstarted/hello-world.md, after:

---
title: "Hello World Quickstart Guide"
description: 'This "hello world" quickstart guide will demonstrate how to setup, build, and deploy your first Solana program in your browser with Solana Playground.'
keywords:
  - playground
  - solana pg
  - on chain
  - rust
  - native program
  - tutorial
  - intro to solana development
  - blockchain developer
  - blockchain tutorial
  - web3 developer
---

For this "hello world" quickstart guide, we will use [Solana Playground](https://beta.solpg.io), a browser based IDE to develop and deploy our Solana program. To use it, you do **NOT** have to install any software on your computer. Simply open Solana Playground in your browser of choice, and you are ready to write and deploy Solana programs.

## What you will learn

- How to get started with Solana Playground
- How to create a Solana wallet on Playground
- How to program a basic Solana program in Rust
- How to build and deploy a Solana Rust program
- How to interact with your on chain program using JavaScript

## Using Solana Playground

[Solana Playground](https://beta.solpg.io) is browser based application that will let you write, build, and deploy on chain Solana programs. All from your browser. No installation needed.

It is a great developer resource for getting started with Solana development, especially on Windows.

### Import our example project

In a new tab in your browser, open our example "_Hello World_" project on Solana Playground: https://beta.solpg.io/6314a69688a7fca897ad7d1d

Next, import the project into your local workspace by clicking the "**Import**" icon and naming your project `hello_world`.

![Import the get started Solana program on Solana Playground](/img/quickstarts/solana-get-started-import-on-playground.png)

> If you do **not** import the program into **your** Solana Playground, then you will **not** be able to make changes to the code. But you **will** still be able to build and deploy the code to a Solana cluster.

### Create a Playground wallet

Normally with [local development](./local.md), you will need to create a file system wallet for use with the Solana CLI. But with the Solana Playground, you only need to click a few buttons to create a browser based wallet.

:::caution
Your _Playground Wallet_ will be saved in your browser's local storage. Clearing your browser cache will remove your saved wallet. When creating a new wallet, you will have the option to save a local copy of your wallet's keypair file.
:::

Click on the red status indicator button at the bottom left of the screen, (optionally) save your wallet's keypair file to your computer for backup, then click "**Continue**".

After your Playground Wallet is created, you will notice the bottom of the window now states your wallet's address, your SOL balance, and the Solana cluster you are connected to (Devnet is usually the default/recommended, but a "localhost" [test validator](./local.md) is also acceptable).

## Create a Solana program

The code for your Rust based Solana program will live in your `src/lib.rs` file. Inside `src/lib.rs` you will be able to import your Rust crates and define your logic. Open your `src/lib.rs` file within Solana Playground.

### Import the `solana_program` crate

At the top of `lib.rs`, we import the `solana-program` crate and bring our needed items into the local namespace:

```rust
use solana_program::{
    account_info::AccountInfo,
    entrypoint,
    entrypoint::ProgramResult,
    pubkey::Pubkey,
    msg,
};
```

### Write your program logic

Every Solana program must define an `entrypoint` that tells the Solana runtime where to start executing your on chain code. Your program's [entrypoint](../developing/on-chain-programs/developing-rust#program-entrypoint) should provide a public function named `process_instruction`:

```rust
// declare and export the program's entrypoint
entrypoint!(process_instruction);

// program entrypoint's implementation
pub fn process_instruction(
    program_id: &Pubkey,
    accounts: &[AccountInfo],
    instruction_data: &[u8]
) -> ProgramResult {
    // log a message to the blockchain
    msg!("Hello, world!");

    // gracefully exit the program
    Ok(())
}
```

Every on chain program should return the `Ok` [result enum](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/result/) with a value of `()`. This tells the Solana runtime that your program executed successfully without errors.

Our program above will simply [log a message](../developing/on-chain-programs/debugging#logging) of "_Hello, world!_" to the blockchain cluster, then gracefully exit with `Ok(())`.

### Build your program

On the left sidebar, select the "**Build & Deploy**" tab. Next, click the "Build" button.

If you look at the Playground's terminal, you should see your Solana program begin to compile. Once complete, you will see a success message.

![Viewing a successful build of your Rust based program](/img/quickstarts/solana-get-started-successful-build.png)

:::caution
You may receive _warning_ when your program is compiled due to unused variables. Don't worry, these warning will not affect your build. They are due to our very simple program not using all the variables we declared in the `process_instruction` function.
:::

### Deploy your program

You can click the "Deploy" button to deploy your first program to the Solana blockchain. Specifically to your selected cluster (e.g. Devnet, Testnet, etc).

After each deployment, you will see your Playground Wallet balance change. By default, Solana Playground will automatically request SOL airdrops on your behalf to ensure your wallet has enough SOL to cover the cost of deployment.

> Note:
> If you need more SOL, you can airdrop more by typing airdrop command in the playground terminal:

```sh
solana airdrop 2
```

![Build and deploy your Solana program to the blockchain](/img/quickstarts/solana-get-started-build-and-deploy.png)

### Find your program id

When executing a program using [web3.js](../developing/clients/javascript-reference.md) or from [another Solana program](../developing/programming-model/calling-between-programs.md), you will need to provide the `program id` (aka public address of your program).

Inside Solana Playground's **Build & Deploy** sidebar, you can find your `program id` under the **Program Credentials** dropdown.

#### Congratulations!

You have successfully setup, built, and deployed a Solana program using the Rust language directly in your browser. Next, we will demonstrate how to interact with your on chain program.

## Interact with your on chain program

Once you have successfully deployed a Solana program to the blockchain, you will want to be able to interact with that program.

Like most developers creating dApps and websites, we will interact with our on chain program using JavaScript. Specifically, will use the open source [NPM package](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@solana/web3.js) `@solana/web3.js` to aid in our client application.

:::info
This web3.js package is an abstraction layer on top of the [JSON RPC API](/api) that reduced the need for rewriting common boilerplate, helping to simplify your client side application code.
:::

### Initialize client

We will be using Solana Playground for the client generation. Create a client folder by running `run` command in the playground terminal:

```bash
run
```

We have created `client` folder and a default `client.ts`. This is where we will work for the rest of our `hello world` program.

### Playground globals

In playground, there are many utilities that are globally available for us to use without installing or setting up anything. Most important ones for our `hello world` program are `web3` for `@solana/web3.js` and `pg` for Solana Playground utilities.

:::info
You can go over all of the available globals by pressing `CTRL+SPACE` (or `CMD+SPACE` on macOS) inside the editor.
:::

### Call the program

To execute your on chain program, you must send a [transaction](../developing/programming-model/transactions.md) to it. Each transaction submitted to the Solana blockchain contains a listing of instructions (and the program's that instruction will interact with).

Here we create a new transaction and add a single `instruction` to it:

```js
// create an empty transaction
const transaction = new web3.Transaction();

// add a hello world program instruction to the transaction
transaction.add(
  new web3.TransactionInstruction({
    keys: [],
    programId: new web3.PublicKey(pg.PROGRAM_ID),
  }),
);
```

Each `instruction` must include all the keys involved in the operation and the program ID we want to execute. In this example `keys` is empty because our program only logs `hello world` and doesn't need any accounts.

With our transaction created, we can submit it to the cluster:

```js
// send the transaction to the Solana cluster
console.log("Sending transaction...");
const txHash = await web3.sendAndConfirmTransaction(
  pg.connection,
  transaction,
  [pg.wallet.keypair],
);
console.log("Transaction sent with hash:", txHash);
```

:::info
The first signer in the signers array is the transaction fee payer by default. We are signing with our keypair `pg.wallet.keypair`.
:::

### Run the application

With the client application written, you can run the code via the same `run` command.

Once your application completes, you will see output similar to this:

```sh
Running client...
  client.ts:
    My address: GkxZRRNPfaUfL9XdYVfKF3rWjMcj5md6b6mpRoWpURwP
    My balance: 5.7254472 SOL
    Sending transaction...
    Transaction sent with hash: 2Ra7D9JoqeNsax9HmNq6MB4qWtKPGcLwoqQ27mPYsPFh3h8wignvKB2mWZVvdzCyTnp7CEZhfg2cEpbavib9mCcq
```

### Get transaction logs

We will be using `solana-cli` directly in playground to get the information about any transaction:

```sh
solana confirm -v <TRANSACTION_HASH>
```

Change `<TRANSACTION_HASH>` with the hash you received from calling `hello world` program.

You should see `Hello, world!` in the **Log Messages** section of the output. 🎉

#### Congratulations!!!

You have now written a client application for your on chain program. You are now a Solana developer!

PS: Try to update your program's message then re-build, re-deploy, and re-execute your program.

## Next steps

See the links below to learn more about writing Solana programs:

- [Setup your local development environment](./local.md)
- [Overview of writing Solana programs](../developing/on-chain-programs/overview)
- [Learn more about developing Solana programs with Rust](../developing/on-chain-programs/developing-Rust)
- [Debugging on chain programs](../developing/on-chain-programs/debugging)
