docs/src/running-validator/restart-cluster.md, before:

## Restarting a cluster

### Step 1. Identify the slot that the cluster will be restarted at

The highest optimistically confirmed slot is the best slot to start from, which
can be found by looking for
[this](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/blob/0264147d42d506fb888f5c4c021a998e231a3e74/core/src/optimistic_confirmation_verifier.rs#L71)
metrics datapoint. Otherwise use the last root.

Call this slot `SLOT_X`

### Step 2. Stop the validator(s)

### Step 3. Optionally install the new solana version

### Step 4. Create a new snapshot for slot `SLOT_X` with a hard fork at slot `SLOT_X`

```bash
$ solana-ledger-tool -l ledger create-snapshot SLOT_X ledger --hard-fork SLOT_X
```

The ledger directory should now contain the new snapshot.
`solana-ledger-tool create-snapshot` will also output the new shred version, and bank hash value,
call this NEW_SHRED_VERSION and NEW_BANK_HASH respectively.

Adjust your validator's arguments:

```bash
 --wait-for-supermajority SLOT_X
 --expected-bank-hash NEW_BANK_HASH
```

Then restart the validator.

Confirm with the log that the validator booted and is now in a holding pattern at `SLOT_X`, waiting for a super majority.

Once NEW_SHRED_VERSION is determined, nudge foundation entrypoint operators to update entrypoints.

### Step 5. Announce the restart on Discord:

Post something like the following to #announcements (adjusting the text as appropriate):

> Hi @Validators,
>
> We've released v1.1.12 and are ready to get testnet back up again.
>
> Steps:
>
> 1. Install the v1.1.12 release: https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/releases/tag/v1.1.12
> 2. a. Preferred method, start from your local ledger with:
>
> ```bash
> solana-validator
>   --wait-for-supermajority SLOT_X     # <-- NEW! IMPORTANT! REMOVE AFTER THIS RESTART
>   --expected-bank-hash NEW_BANK_HASH  # <-- NEW! IMPORTANT! REMOVE AFTER THIS RESTART
>   --hard-fork SLOT_X                  # <-- NEW! IMPORTANT! REMOVE AFTER THIS RESTART
>   --no-snapshot-fetch                 # <-- NEW! IMPORTANT! REMOVE AFTER THIS RESTART
>   --entrypoint entrypoint.testnet.solana.com:8001
>   --known-validator 5D1fNXzvv5NjV1ysLjirC4WY92RNsVH18vjmcszZd8on
>   --expected-genesis-hash 4uhcVJyU9pJkvQyS88uRDiswHXSCkY3zQawwpjk2NsNY
>   --only-known-rpc
>   --limit-ledger-size
>   ...                                # <-- your other --identity/--vote-account/etc arguments
> ```
>
> b. If your validator doesn't have ledger up to slot SLOT_X or if you have deleted your ledger, have it instead download a snapshot with:
>
> ```bash
> solana-validator
>   --wait-for-supermajority SLOT_X     # <-- NEW! IMPORTANT! REMOVE AFTER THIS RESTART
>   --expected-bank-hash NEW_BANK_HASH  # <-- NEW! IMPORTANT! REMOVE AFTER THIS RESTART
>   --entrypoint entrypoint.testnet.solana.com:8001
>   --known-validator 5D1fNXzvv5NjV1ysLjirC4WY92RNsVH18vjmcszZd8on
>   --expected-genesis-hash 4uhcVJyU9pJkvQyS88uRDiswHXSCkY3zQawwpjk2NsNY
>   --only-known-rpc
>   --limit-ledger-size
>   ...                                # <-- your other --identity/--vote-account/etc arguments
> ```
>
>      You can check for which slots your ledger has with: `solana-ledger-tool -l path/to/ledger bounds`
>
> 3. Wait until 80% of the stake comes online
>
> To confirm your restarted validator is correctly waiting for the 80%:
> a. Look for `N% of active stake visible in gossip` log messages
> b. Ask it over RPC what slot it's on: `solana --url http://127.0.0.1:8899 slot`. It should return `SLOT_X` until we get to 80% stake
>
> Thanks!

### Step 7. Wait and listen

Monitor the validators as they restart. Answer questions, help folks,

## Troubleshooting

### 80% of the stake didn't participate in the restart, now what?
If less than 80% of the stake join the restart after a reasonable amount of
time, it will be necessary to retry the restart attempt with the stake from the
non-responsive validators removed.

The community should identify and come to social consensus on the set of
non-responsive validators. Then all participating validators return to Step 4
and create a new snapshot with additional `--destake-vote-account <PUBKEY>`
arguments for each of the non-responsive validator's vote account address

```bash
$ solana-ledger-tool -l ledger create-snapshot SLOT_X ledger --hard-fork SLOT_X \
    --destake-vote-account <VOTE_ACCOUNT_1> \
    --destake-vote-account <VOTE_ACCOUNT_2> \
    .
    .
    --destake-vote-account <VOTE_ACCOUNT_N> \
```

This will cause all stake associated with the non-responsive validators to be
immediately deactivated. All their stakers will need to re-delegate their stake
once the cluster restart is successful.

Commit message:

Update restart guide to include the use of `solana-ledger-tool latest-optimistic-slots` (#28267)

docs/src/running-validator/restart-cluster.md, after:

## Restarting a cluster

### Step 1. Identify the latest optimistically confirmed slot for the cluster

In Solana 1.14 or greater, run the following command to output the latest
optimistically confirmed slot your validator observed:
```bash
solana-ledger-tool -l ledger latest-optimistic-slots
```

In Solana 1.13 or less, the latest optimistically confirmed can be found by looking for the more recent occurence of
[this](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/blob/0264147d42d506fb888f5c4c021a998e231a3e74/core/src/optimistic_confirmation_verifier.rs#L71)
metrics datapoint.

Call this slot `SLOT_X`

Note that it's possible that some validators observed an optimistically
confirmed slot that's greater than others before the outage.  Survey the other
validators on the cluster to ensure that a greater optimistically confirmed slot
does not exist before proceeding. If a greater slot value is found use it
instead.


### Step 2. Stop the validator(s)

### Step 3. Optionally install the new solana version

### Step 4. Create a new snapshot for slot `SLOT_X` with a hard fork at slot `SLOT_X`

```bash
$ solana-ledger-tool -l ledger create-snapshot SLOT_X ledger --hard-fork SLOT_X
```

The ledger directory should now contain the new snapshot.
`solana-ledger-tool create-snapshot` will also output the new shred version, and bank hash value,
call this NEW_SHRED_VERSION and NEW_BANK_HASH respectively.

Adjust your validator's arguments:

```bash
 --wait-for-supermajority SLOT_X
 --expected-bank-hash NEW_BANK_HASH
```

Then restart the validator.

Confirm with the log that the validator booted and is now in a holding pattern at `SLOT_X`, waiting for a super majority.

Once NEW_SHRED_VERSION is determined, nudge foundation entrypoint operators to update entrypoints.

### Step 5. Announce the restart on Discord:

Post something like the following to #announcements (adjusting the text as appropriate):

> Hi @Validators,
>
> We've released v1.1.12 and are ready to get testnet back up again.
>
> Steps:
>
> 1. Install the v1.1.12 release: https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/releases/tag/v1.1.12
> 2. a. Preferred method, start from your local ledger with:
>
> ```bash
> solana-validator
>   --wait-for-supermajority SLOT_X     # <-- NEW! IMPORTANT! REMOVE AFTER THIS RESTART
>   --expected-bank-hash NEW_BANK_HASH  # <-- NEW! IMPORTANT! REMOVE AFTER THIS RESTART
>   --hard-fork SLOT_X                  # <-- NEW! IMPORTANT! REMOVE AFTER THIS RESTART
>   --no-snapshot-fetch                 # <-- NEW! IMPORTANT! REMOVE AFTER THIS RESTART
>   --entrypoint entrypoint.testnet.solana.com:8001
>   --known-validator 5D1fNXzvv5NjV1ysLjirC4WY92RNsVH18vjmcszZd8on
>   --expected-genesis-hash 4uhcVJyU9pJkvQyS88uRDiswHXSCkY3zQawwpjk2NsNY
>   --only-known-rpc
>   --limit-ledger-size
>   ...                                # <-- your other --identity/--vote-account/etc arguments
> ```
>
> b. If your validator doesn't have ledger up to slot SLOT_X or if you have deleted your ledger, have it instead download a snapshot with:
>
> ```bash
> solana-validator
>   --wait-for-supermajority SLOT_X     # <-- NEW! IMPORTANT! REMOVE AFTER THIS RESTART
>   --expected-bank-hash NEW_BANK_HASH  # <-- NEW! IMPORTANT! REMOVE AFTER THIS RESTART
>   --entrypoint entrypoint.testnet.solana.com:8001
>   --known-validator 5D1fNXzvv5NjV1ysLjirC4WY92RNsVH18vjmcszZd8on
>   --expected-genesis-hash 4uhcVJyU9pJkvQyS88uRDiswHXSCkY3zQawwpjk2NsNY
>   --only-known-rpc
>   --limit-ledger-size
>   ...                                # <-- your other --identity/--vote-account/etc arguments
> ```
>
>      You can check for which slots your ledger has with: `solana-ledger-tool -l path/to/ledger bounds`
>
> 3. Wait until 80% of the stake comes online
>
> To confirm your restarted validator is correctly waiting for the 80%:
> a. Look for `N% of active stake visible in gossip` log messages
> b. Ask it over RPC what slot it's on: `solana --url http://127.0.0.1:8899 slot`. It should return `SLOT_X` until we get to 80% stake
>
> Thanks!

### Step 7. Wait and listen

Monitor the validators as they restart. Answer questions, help folks,

## Troubleshooting

### 80% of the stake didn't participate in the restart, now what?
If less than 80% of the stake join the restart after a reasonable amount of
time, it will be necessary to retry the restart attempt with the stake from the
non-responsive validators removed.

The community should identify and come to social consensus on the set of
non-responsive validators. Then all participating validators return to Step 4
and create a new snapshot with additional `--destake-vote-account <PUBKEY>`
arguments for each of the non-responsive validator's vote account address

```bash
$ solana-ledger-tool -l ledger create-snapshot SLOT_X ledger --hard-fork SLOT_X \
    --destake-vote-account <VOTE_ACCOUNT_1> \
    --destake-vote-account <VOTE_ACCOUNT_2> \
    .
    .
    --destake-vote-account <VOTE_ACCOUNT_N> \
```

This will cause all stake associated with the non-responsive validators to be
immediately deactivated. All their stakers will need to re-delegate their stake
once the cluster restart is successful.
