docs/src/api/websocket/_slotsUpdatesSubscribe.mdx, before:

import {
  DocBlock,
  DocSideBySide,
  CodeParams,
  Parameter,
  Field,
  Values,
  CodeSnippets,
} from "../../../components/CodeDocBlock";

<DocBlock>

## slotsUpdatesSubscribe

Subscribe to receive a notification from the validator on a variety of updates
on every slot

:::caution
This subscription is unstable

**NOTE: the format of this subscription may change in the future and it may not always be supported**
:::

<DocSideBySide>
<CodeParams>

### Parameters:

**None**

### Result:

`<integer>` - Subscription id (needed to unsubscribe)

</CodeParams>

<CodeSnippets>

### Code sample:

```json
{ "jsonrpc": "2.0", "id": 1, "method": "slotsUpdatesSubscribe" }
```

### Response:

```json
{ "jsonrpc": "2.0", "result": 0, "id": 1 }
```

</CodeSnippets>
</DocSideBySide>

#### Notification Format:

The notification will be an object with the following fields:

- `parent: <u64>` - The parent slot
- `slot: <u64>` - The newly updated slot
- `timestamp: <i64>` - The Unix timestamp of the update
- `type: <string>` - The update type, one of:
  - "firstShredReceived"
  - "completed"
  - "createdBank"
  - "frozen"
  - "dead"
  - "optimisticConfirmation"
  - "root"

```bash
{
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "method": "slotsUpdatesNotification",
  "params": {
    "result": {
      "parent": 75,
      "slot": 76,
      "timestamp": 1625081266243,
      "type": "optimisticConfirmation"
    },
    "subscription": 0
  }
}
```

</DocBlock>

Commit message:

RPC: update websocket docs (#33460)
* [rpc]: update websocket docs

* rename rewards to showRewards

* add remaining optional fields for slotsUpdates

* update block subscription showRewards

docs/src/api/websocket/_slotsUpdatesSubscribe.mdx, after:

import {
  DocBlock,
  DocSideBySide,
  CodeParams,
  Parameter,
  Field,
  Values,
  CodeSnippets,
} from "../../../components/CodeDocBlock";

<DocBlock>

## slotsUpdatesSubscribe

Subscribe to receive a notification from the validator on a variety of updates
on every slot

:::caution
This subscription is unstable

**NOTE: the format of this subscription may change in the future and it may not always be supported**
:::

<DocSideBySide>
<CodeParams>

### Parameters:

**None**

### Result:

`<integer>` - Subscription id (needed to unsubscribe)

</CodeParams>

<CodeSnippets>

### Code sample:

```json
{ "jsonrpc": "2.0", "id": 1, "method": "slotsUpdatesSubscribe" }
```

### Response:

```json
{ "jsonrpc": "2.0", "result": 0, "id": 1 }
```

</CodeSnippets>
</DocSideBySide>

#### Notification Format:

The notification will be an object with the following fields:

- `err: <string|undefined>` - The error message. Only present if the update is of type "dead".
- `parent: <u64|undefined>` - The parent slot. Only present if the update is of type "createdBank".
- `slot: <u64>` - The newly updated slot
- `stats: <object|undefined>` - The error message. Only present if the update is of type "frozen". An object with the following fields:
  - `maxTransactionsPerEntry: <u64>`,
  - `numFailedTransactions: <u64>`,
  - `numSuccessfulTransactions: <u64>`,
  - `numTransactionEntries: <u64>`,
- `timestamp: <i64>` - The Unix timestamp of the update
- `type: <string>` - The update type, one of:
  - "firstShredReceived"
  - "completed"
  - "createdBank"
  - "frozen"
  - "dead"
  - "optimisticConfirmation"
  - "root"

```bash
{
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "method": "slotsUpdatesNotification",
  "params": {
    "result": {
      "parent": 75,
      "slot": 76,
      "timestamp": 1625081266243,
      "type": "optimisticConfirmation"
    },
    "subscription": 0
  }
}
```

</DocBlock>
