# Introduction

This document defines the architecture of Solana, a blockchain built from the
ground up for scale. The goal of the architecture is to demonstrate there
exists a set of software algorithms that in combination, removes software as a
performance bottleneck, allowing transaction throughput to scale proportionally
with network bandwidth. The architecture goes on to satisfy all three desirable
properties of a proper blockchain, that it not only be scalable, but that it is
also secure and decentralized.

With this architecture, we calculate a theoretical upper bound of 710 thousand
transactions per second (tps) on a standard gigabit network and 28.4 million
tps on 40 gigabit. In practice, our focus has been on gigabit.  We soak-tested
a 150 node permissioned testnet and it is able to maintain a mean transaction
throughput of approximately 200 thousand tps with peaks over 400 thousand.

Furthermore, we have found high throughput extends beyond simple payments, and
that this architecture is also able to perform safe, concurrent execution of
programs authored in a general purpose programming language, such as C. We feel
the extension warrants industry focus on an additional performance metric
already common in the CPU industry, millions of *instructions* per second or
mips. By measuring mips, we see that batching instructions within a transaction
amortizes the cost of signature verification, lifting the maximum theoretical
instruction throughput up to almost exactly that of centralized databases.

Lastly, we discuss the relationships between high throughput, security and
transaction fees.  Solana's efficient use hardware drives transaction fees into
the ballpark of 1/1000th of a cent. The drop in fees in turn makes certain
denial of service attacks cheaper. We discuss what these attacks look like and
Solana's techniques to defend against them.

